10Letters of AppreciationI have yet to be bored by someone paying me a compliment.—OTTO VAN ISCHLetters of appreciation are the easiest, most delightful letters to write. You are never obliged to write them, there is no deadline, and the only rule is sincerity. One of life’s small pleasures is to be able to be kind and generous with little cost to yourself.Letters of appreciation are related to letters of acknowledgment, congratulations, and thanks. In the latter cases, we are not surprised to hear from others, whereas a letter of appreciation is always unexpected. When Aunt Estrella gives you a gift, you thank her. When Aunt Estrella sends your son a graduation gift, he thanks her, but you write a letter of appreciation, saying how much her support of your children has meant to you over the years.You don’t need to thank someone for prompt payment, for turning in a report, for giving you a bonus based on performance, or for returning your lost wallet intact. In all these cases people are doing the expected thing. However, it is entirely appropriate to show your appreciation. As Abraham Lincoln said, “Everybody likes a compliment.”Letters of appreciation are sent to employees who do “ordinary” work, but do it well; to strangers you encounter who demonstrate above-average efficiency and service; to friends and relatives who go the extra mile for you; to people who have referred work or clients to you; perhaps to people you’ve read about in the newspaper who have contributed something to your community.Write Letters of Appreciation for• awards/honors• bonuses• commendations/compliments/encouragement/praise• community service• complimentary letters about company/employee/service/product• customer referrals• customers to whom you extend privileges in appreciation of their business/ prompt payments/new accounts72HOW TO SAY IT® / 73• customers whose business you want to acknowledge• employers for a bonus/raise/promotion• employees for their good work• financial contributions• group efforts• helpful advice/suggestions/tips• introductions• prompt payments• public figures whose work you admire• speeches/workshops/conferences• sympathy (see also ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, THANK YOU)• volunteersHow to Say It• State what you appreciate (a talent, the business lunch, the plans for the new building).• Use a key word early in your note: “appreciation,” “congratulations,”“gratitude,” “admiration,” “recognition.”• Be specific about the person’s work, talent, or actions: “You’re a delight to work with because…” or “Your work has meant a lot to the company because…” In some cases, relate an anecdote, a shared memory, or reflection that bolsters your good wishes.• Close with wishes for continued success or with some forward-looking remark about your future business or personal association.What Not to Say• Don’t add information, a meeting reminder, or a sales message; for maximum impact your upbeat message should stand alone.• Don’t express more than you feel. People know when your sentiments are insincere. Use language that feels genuine and comfortable to you; avoid effusiveness, exaggeration, and excessive flattery.• Don’t talk about “luck” when expressing appreciation; it implies that chance rather than talent and hard work was responsible for the person’s achievements.• Don’t use letters of appreciation to customers as an excuse to solicit more business or for your future advantage; a meaningful letter of appreciation has only one purpose.Tips on Writing• Be brief, warm, and sincere. The “brief” part is easy, but if you have trouble being warm and sincere, you might want to think about74 / HOW TO SAY IT®why you’re writing. Perhaps it is not a letter of appreciation that you need to send.• Be slightly formal. Even when you know well the person to whom you’re writing, a certain formality increases its impact.• Be positive. Instead of writing, “I never thought you could do it,”say “You’ve shown us what a person can do with enough energy and determination.”• When someone sends you a letter of appreciation, reflect on what pleases you about it. Remember this the next time you write one.Special Situations• Letters of appreciation sent to customers, present and potential, are more sales letters than letters of appreciation (see SALES).• Enormous goodwill can be generated for your business by writing brief, sincere notes of appreciation to employees, customers, or suppliers. Once you start looking for ways to appreciate people, you will see them everywhere; make a habit of sending off appreciative notes several times a month.• Sometimes you need to turn down something—a gift, an invitation, a membership—but you are flattered and pleased at the thought behind it, so you write a letter that is part appreciation, part refusal (see also REFUSALS).• Letters of appreciation can be written to several employees at once—teams, divisions, branch offices, sectors, and other groups that have performed particularly well or solved a problem.• “A fan letter is an enduring testament to excellence, which puts it in a category of its own—perhaps somewhere between a valentine and an honorary degree.” (Jennifer Williams) When writing a fan letter to a movie star or public figure, be brief (no more than one page).There is little point in asking for the person to call you or see you—as they say, “only in your dreams.” Requesting a photograph is acceptable, although not everyone will respond. Don’t send a gift; it’s unlikely that the person will ever see it (it will be donated to a nonprofit organization). Addresses for most celebrities can be obtained at the library.• If your company gives corporate gifts, attaching handwritten notes of appreciation will double their impact. Seventy-five years ago, Agnes Repplier wrote, “Letterwriting on the part of a busy man or woman is the quintessence of generosity.” In today’s fast-lane business culture, this generosity is even more highly regarded. Unlike the spoken compliment, this one can be read and re-read.HOW TO SAY IT® / 75Format• Use postcards for one-or two-sentence notes of appreciation. In just minutes you can dash off notes rich in public relations potential.Consider postcards featuring scenery from your area for people outside it, art postcards, reprints from old movies that might relate to your business or your interests, or even an especially attractive picture of your factory, office, building, or other installation.• Personal notes of appreciation are handwritten on foldovers or personal stationery.• Business letters of appreciation are typed on letterhead stationery if you have a somewhat formal relationship with the person. In more casual contexts, jot an appreciative message on memo paper.• E-mail, which wouldn’t be appropriate for a standard thank-you note, is often useful for the quick note of appreciation. Some things seem too trivial to warrant notepaper and pen, but are just right for e-mail: “Great presentation!” (from a colleague; from a superior, a handwritten note would be preferable); “I noticed your rose garden when I drove by the other day—fabulous!”; “Heard you got another patent—way to go!”WORDSadmirehonorrecommendthoughtfulnessappreciateimpressiverefreshingthrilledcommendableinspiredremarkabletoucheddelightfulkindnessrespecttreasureengagingknowledgeablesatisfyingtriumphenjoyablelarge-heartedsensationaluniquefascinatingmemorablesincerevaluablefavoriteone-of-a-kindspecialwelcomegenerousoverwhelmedstunnedgraciouspleasedsuperbPHRASESappreciate yourI want you to knowcontributions tohow much we/Ias a token of ourappreciategratitude/appreciationjob well done76 / HOW TO SAY IT®grateful to you foroffer my complimentsdelighted to learn aboutlet me tell you howmuch I likedheard about your successrealize the worth ofheld in high regardset great store byhope I can returnthink highly ofthe favor somedayI am impressed by/withwe can point with prideI appreciate the timewish you welland effort youexpended onwithout your dedication andimportant contributionexpertiseit was thoughtful of you towould like to compliment you onSENTENCESAs principal of Jerome Elementary School, you might like to know that we think Miss Eurgain is an absolute treasure.Can you stand one more compliment?Customers like you are the reason we stay in business.I’d like to express my appreciation for the knowledgeable and sympathetic care you gave me during my hospitalization for bypass surgery.I don’t know how I would have managed without your help.If I can repay your kindness, let me know.I’m impressed!I sincerely appreciate your time and attention.I want to express my appreciation to all of you for the extra hours and hard work you put in last week to secure the Gryseworth contract.I want to tell you how much I appreciate what you are doing for the recycling program in our neighborhood.My hat’s off to you!Thanks again for your clever and useful suggestion.The Ridley County School Board would like to add its thanks and appreciation to those of the recipients of the scholarships you made possible.This past year has been a banner year for the company, and you have contributed significantly to its success.We are all happy for you.Well done!HOW TO SAY IT® / 77Your efforts have made this possible.Your support is greatly appreciated.You’ve done it again!PARAGRAPHSAs Bette Midler once said, “People are not the best because they work hard. They work hard because they are the best.” And you are the best!Know that we appreciate you!You’ve been a valued cardmember with Stuyvesant Bank since 1990, and we thank you for the exceptional manner in which you’ve handled your account. To show our appreciation, we’ve preapproved you for our premier bankcard, the Gold 100. We think you will find it to be the ultimate in credit card performance.Please accept the enclosed token of our appreciation for your five years as one of our most dependable and delightful volunteers. We don’t know what we would do without you!Thank you for your timely and excellent solution to the problem of tangled hoses. Only those of us who have struggled with this annoying and time-consuming inconvenience can appreciate what a delight the new boom system will be. You will be receiving an Outstanding Contribution award in May, but I didn’t want to wait that long before telling you how pleased and impressed we all are.All of us here at Legson, Ltd. enjoyed your enthusiastic letter about the quality of our lace goods. We are proud to offer such a wide selection of fine handiwork from all four corners of the globe. Please accept with our appreciation the enclosed 20% discount coupon good on your next order.Appreciation and thanks go to Angela Messenger and her Documentation Department for a successful transformation of the tracking system.The new equipment and its faster, more accurate method of record-keeping will help keep us in the forefront of the Stout, Old, Mild, Bitter, Family Ales market. Our success here at Marsden & Company is due to an exceptional group of talented employees.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Dr. Rowlands,Your suggestions for next year’s technical forum are much appreciated.I’ve turned them over to the steering committee, although I suspect you’ll be invited to join them. I hope you will accept—your ideas seem as workable as they are useful.Sincerely yours,78 / HOW TO SAY IT®Dear Ms. Lees-Noel:I’m told that you were the good-hearted soul who kept my desk from overflowing during my sick leave (while still keeping up with your own work).Instead of the chaos I expected to return to, I was able to start back with a clear slate. I am most appreciative of everything you did. I don’t know whether this is a compliment or not, but you did things just the way I would have!Do call on me if I can ever return the favor.Sincerely,Dear Mr. Fitzmarshall:We were pleased to learn that you received such outstanding service from one of our employees. Be assured that we have passed on your compliments to Ms. Stretton. You will perhaps enjoy knowing that in recognition of her talent and managerial skills, Ms. Stretton has just been promoted to floor supervisor.We appreciate your taking the time to write us.Yours truly,Dear Mrs. Sixsmith,Thank you for accompanying the fifth and sixth graders to Language Camp last weekend. I understand you chaperoned the group on your own time. Since Ronald arrived home, I’ve heard dozens of stories of your helpfulness, good humor, and ability to make the camp a home-away-from-home for these youngsters.We felt a lot better knowing you would be with the group, and we appreciate Ronald’s opportunity to spend time with a dynamic adult who’s a good role model.With best wishes,Dear Ms. Stanley,The entire department joins me in thanking you for the superb workshop on hard disk filing systems. We all learned a great deal (I was fascinated by your introductory description of early Abyssinian slate files).I am passing on your brochure to George Hickson in Building 201-BEin case he would be interested in having you speak to his department.Yours truly,Dear Judge Whipple,Congratulations on the editorial you wrote for Sunday’s op-ed page.I have followed your career over the years and have been impressed byHOW TO SAY IT® / 79your passion for justice, especially for society’s most vulnerable people: children, the homeless, and those with disabilities.My best wishes to you for professional and personal happiness.Sincerely,See also: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, CONGRATULATIONS, GOODWILL, THANK YOU.