11Belated LettersPeople who are late are often so much jollier thanthe people who have to wait for them.—EDWARD VERRALL LUCASOne of the most difficult letters to write is the one that is overdue. Every day that passes magnifies our guilt and intensifies our resistance to writing; too often we end up not writing at all.Centuries ago, Titus Livius advised, “Better late than never.” In the case of a letter, “late” is inconsiderate. “Never” can be unpardonable.Your effort in writing, even though belated, will be appreciated.Belated Letters Include• letters dealing with sensitive issues (see also SENSITIVE)• letters to family and friends who have written us such lovely, long, newsy letters that we don’t know where to begin to answer them (see also FAMILY)• refusal and rejection letters (see also REFUSALS)• sympathy notes for which we feel we have no words (see also SYMPATHY)• thank-you notes for gifts we didn’t like or that were so generous we were overwhelmed by them (see also THANK YOU)How to Say It• Avoid the situation in the first place by organizing letters to be answered in order of importance. Don’t respond to less difficult letters until you have taken care of those on top of the pile.• Briefly acknowledge your tardiness and then go directly to the main message.What Not to Say• Don’t go into a long song and dance about how sorry you are for your tardiness, or an even longer explanation of exactly why you 80HOW TO SAY IT® / 81couldn’t write earlier. “Don’t fillmorethan a page and a half with apologies for not having written sooner!” (Lewis Carroll) Egocentric agonizing about your shortcomings only takes the spotlight off the other person and focuses it on you.• Don’t imply the tardiness is somehow the other person’s fault (“I’m always nervous about writing you because you write such beautiful letters” or “I didn’t want to hurt your feelings with our rejection, so I put off writing”).Tips on Writing• Keep a selection of interesting postcards on hand. When you realize you’re going to have trouble writing a letter, send a brief note on a postcard acknowledging the issue and saying you’ll write soon.This does away with the sense of something hanging over you. The letter will be twice as easy to write when you get to it because you’ll feel virtuous for having sent the postcard.• Knowing that “the path of later leads to the house of never”(Donald E. Walker), set yourself up for success. Address an envelope to the person. Open a computer file or pick up pen and paper. You’ll feel the weight of a half-begun task pulling at you and you will find it easier to finish it, just to get that envelope off your desk.• Don’t feel you have to write three times as much and four times as charmingly because you’re late; this kind of pressure will keep you from ever writing. Write the letter you would have written had you written it earlier.• We aren’t the only ones behind in our correspondence. Oscar W.Firkins (in Ina Ten Eyck Firkins, ed.,Memoirs and Letters of Oscar W.Firkins,1934) was often late:“I want to write a word to you this morning to thank you for the kind letter I received some months ago, and to assure you that my silence has meant neither forgetfulness nor indifference.”“Again delay has overtaken me in the matter of response to your letter.Examination time and the preparations for my trip must shoulder part of the responsibility, and the rest must be referred to that immemorial scapegoat, human nature.”“I have long had in mind a letter to you, postponed by the foolish wish we all have to write more and better tomorrow instead of less and worse today.”Sylvia Townsend Warner (in William Maxwell, ed.,Letters: SylviaTownsend Warner,Viking Press, 1982) did her share of apologizing:“It is disgraceful that I have meant for so long to write to you, and put it off for equally long.”82 / HOW TO SAY IT®“I have begun many letters to you in my mind, and some even on paper, but never finished them.”“I have been a Hog with Bristles not to have written to you before—though I got back ten days ago I have not had a moment to turn around in since, not to turn around with any feelings of leisure and amplitude, such as I would want when I write to you.”“You must have thought me very ungrateful in not writing before to thank you for taking so much trouble about my poems. My time has been taken up with visitors.”Special Situations• Although in principle there is zero tolerance for business tardiness—late deliveries, unaswered letters, unfilled orders—it happens.Frequently. Advice in this chapter is useful, but for industrial-strength help, see ADJUSTMENTS and APOLOGIES.• When late with a “thank you,” don’t take more than a phrase or a sentence to apologize (“My thanks are no less sincere for being so unforgivably late”; “I am sorry not to have told you sooner how much we enjoyed your homemade chutney”). There are not many good excuses for being late with a thank-you note, so don’t offer one—it’s bound to appear feeble. It’s better to say you have no excuse and you’re sorry. Then continue with an expression of your thanks, which should probably be more fervent and well-crafted than if you’d written at once. “The obligation to express gratitude deepens with procrastina-tion. The longer you wait, the more effusive must be the thanks.” (Judith Martin, “Miss Manners”)Format• All belated letters take the format of the letter as it would originally have been written: a handwritten belated thank-you note; a typewritten apology on letterhead stationery for a business tardiness.WORDSabsentmindedforgiveoverlookremissapologiesinadvertentlypardonsheepishdistressednegligenceregretsorryembarrassedHOW TO SAY IT® / 83PHRASESaccept my apologyI am upset aboutasleep at the wheel/on the job/I don’t know how it happened thatat the switchintended to write immediatelydelayed answering your lettermuch to my regretbecauseno excuse forembarrassing to discover thatnot from any lack ofexcuse the delaypardon my late responsefeel sorry/terrible/bad aboutreproach myselfforgive my tardinessslipped my mindSENTENCESI apologize for not having responded sooner.I hope my tardiness in answering your question has not greatly inconvenienced you.I imagine that everyone but me has written by now to congratulate you on your promotion and exciting move to Los Angeles.I’m sorry for the delay in getting back to you—I’ve been out of town the past three weeks.I’m sorry—this letter is badly overdue.I’ve been writing you in my head for weeks—it’s time to get it down on paper.My delay in acknowledging the touching gift of your father’s stamp collection is simply inexcusable.My tardiness is due to bouts of extreme busyness and bouts of extreme laziness—I don’t know which is worse.Our best wishes for your 75th birthday are no less warm and heartfelt for being so late.Our holiday greetings are late this year, frankly for no good reason.Please forgive me for not writing sooner to thank you for the unique and useful fleur-de-lis letter-opener.Please forgive the delay in responding to your letter of June 14.PARAGRAPHSWell, yes, it’s me responding with my usual promptness. I wish that I had any kind of excuse (I’ve been hospitalized, I’ve been imprisoned,84 / HOW TO SAY IT®I’ve been on a secret mission, I’m a finalist with Publisher’s Clearing House), but sadly I do not.I might have to borrow Groucho Marx’s explanation for his belated letter: “Excuse me for not answering your letter sooner, but I’ve been so busy not answering letters that I couldn’t get around to not answering yours in time.”Many and fervent (but, alas, belated) good wishes to you on your birthday. I’ve got a bad sector in my brain, and can’t remember if it was this year or last year that I sent you the birthday card with the warthogs on it. However, I’m betting on last year.We apologize for the delay in scheduling your tree trimming. The cleanup after the May 30 storm left us shorthanded for everything else.A crew is available at 8 a.m. on the following dates: June 6, 9, 10. Please call with a day that is convenient for you.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Maurice Garcia,Please accept our apology for not letting you know that the Carlist desktop organizer (# CL-5521) you ordered on February 11 is temporarily out of stock. You are correct: three weeks is a long time to wait for something billed for same-day shipping. In the normal way, you would have received a postcard asking whether you wished to wait until we had the item in stock or wished to change or cancel your order.As you’ve ordered the organizer from another company, we will cancel your order with Wallace Office Supply. In the meantime, I am enclosing a coupon good for 20% off your next Wallace order. We regret the inconvenience to you and look forward to serving you more effectively in the future.Dear Roberta Alden,Please excuse the delay in sending you your copy of the signed contract (enclosed). Mr. Dreiser will be calling you next week about the schedule.Sincerely,Clyde GriffithsFrom: “PT”<akadoc@email.net>To: “Mary”<MMM@email.net>Date: Tue, 15 Aug 2000 11:26:14-0500Hi, I have a good excuse for not writing. I’ve been thinking. For example, did you hear about the guy who collected paste jewelery? He was hooked on faux onyx! Ha, ha, ha…Dear Reverend Charwell,HOW TO SAY IT® / 85I said I would notify you as soon as we made a decision on filling our associate position. I imagine that, not having heard from us, you assumed correctly that we had offered the position to another candidate. However, I am sorry to be so late letting you know myself.We were impressed with your credentials, especially with your achievements in Porthminster and with the references from Hubert Conway and Jean Tasbrugh. In the end, however, we decided in favor of the candidate with more experience in homiletics.Best wishes to you for continued good work in your ministry.From: BJZG@email.netTo: RMK@email.netDate: Fri, 7 Jul 2000 12:33:33 EDTSubject: a major case of guilt—yea, a boatload Oh, right. I neglect you shamefully and what do you do in return?You send me a present! I am scheduling hari-kiri for next Wednesday at 11:20. Be there.Dear Dorcy Aldrich,Please forgive our tardiness in thanking you for your generous and valued donation to the Hatcher Ide Community Affairs Fund. Because moneys received in our current fundraising drive are being matched, your contribution is a significant one for us.Thank you for being one of our most consistent and openhanded supporters.See also: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, APOLOGIES, SENSITIVE, THANKYOU.