12Collection LettersThe object of collection letters is to get the money without losing the customer.—N.H. AND S.K. MAGERWhen writing collection letters you have two goals that work against each other: you want the customer to pay the overdue account and you want to keep the customer’s goodwill and business. Well-written, effective collection letters pay off handsomely, not only because of the retrieved income but also because of the delinquent accounts that become dependable accounts.Collection attempts most often begin as past-due reminders from a company’s billing office, accounting department, or credit division.When the account is thirty, sixty, or ninety days overdue, the first of a series of collection letters will be sent. Only when the company’s series of increasingly aggressive collection letters is ignored is the account turned over to a collection agency. Many large firms use statistical models to predict which accounts need more aggressive action early on.Remember, too, that given a large population of overdue accounts, the single most effective collection method may be a pleasant telephone reminder.Collection Letters Include• announcements that the account is being turned over to lawyer/collection agency• letters to lawyer/collection agency• personal collection letters: friend/relative• reminders• series of increasingly insistent letters• thank you for paymentHow to Say It• Collection letters can reach levels of high art in their quest to collect on an overdue bill without losing the customer’s goodwill. They are always courteous and in the beginning they assume that the customer intends to pay but has been forgetful. Each letter sent to an overdue 86HOW TO SAY IT® / 87account is written as though it is the last; you are optimistic, appreciative, confident. Include: customer, order, or invoice number; date and amount of purchase; items purchased; original payment due date; date by which you expect payment now; references to previous letters about the outstanding balance; suggested payment plan; other descriptive information. Leave enough time (two to three weeks between letters) to give the customer a chance to pay. End each letter with a definite request as well as a statement that if payment has been sent this letter can be ignored. Include a postage-paid reply envelope to encourage prompt response. A suggested plan featuring six collection letters is given below. Your own needs may be met by a series of four or ten, or you may prefer to vary the messages.• Collection letter 1: After sending several statements indicating the past-due status of the account (perhaps with a stamped message or reminder sticker that says “Past Due” or “Second Notice”), you send a gentle, friendly letter pointing out the overdue payment. Your letter is brief, saying simply that a stated amount is so many weeks or months overdue. You pleasantly request payment.• Collection letter 2: You are a little more insistent and remind the customer that payment still hasn’t been received. In a second paragraph, ask for explanations or suggest several face-saving reasons why the person hasn’t paid (bill was overlooked, was lost in the mail, customer was away). Close with an expression of your confidence that the payment will be sent at once.• Collection letter 3: Your tone becomes more urgent, your letter is longer, and you give the customer one or more good reasons to pay the bill: it will protect their credit rating and reputation; it is a matter of fairness/justice/conscience; it is the responsible thing to do; it will make them feel good; it is a matter of their self-respect; it is in their own best self-interest. In this or the next letter, propose two payment schedules that are acceptable to you, and offer the customer a choice.Divide the past-due amount into weekly, semi-monthly, monthly, or two lump-sum payments.• Collection letter 4: Your message is increasingly stern, and you present additional arguments for payment: you have carried out your obligations by providing the service or shipping the goods and now they must carry out theirs; the amount is too small to lose their credit rating over it; the customer wouldn’t want to be placed on your delinquent list; they wouldn’t want to be reported to the trade credit bureau; they will not be able to place any future orders with you. For the first time, you mention the possibility of turning their account over to a collection agent or attorney for collection.• Collection letter 5: By now you assume the customer is aware of the problem and is deliberately avoiding payment. In a strong message, you announce that you’re obliged to take other action, to turn the account over to a collection agency for collection or to a lawyer for88 / HOW TO SAY IT®legal action. (If you opt for legal action, word your letter with your attorney’s advice.) Even now, however, give the customer ten days in which to make arrangements to settle the account before taking action. Be clear that the action can be avoided if the customer responds at once.• Collection letter 6: The final letter represents your belief that the customer will pay only if compelled. You say that the account is being transferred to a stated collection agency or to a stated law firm as of a stated date. This letter simply announces the action you’re taking; you no longer try to get the customer to pay.• When you write to the collection agency, give complete information: name, address, telephone numbers, account number, copies of all correspondence, statements, data sheets.What Not to Say• Don’t threaten the customer with a collection agency or legal action until you are ready to pursue these avenues. If you say you are turning the account over to a collection agency in ten days, do so.• Don’t use words like “failure” (“your failure to respond,” “failure to pay”); “ignore” (“you have ignored our letters”); “insist” or “demand” (“we insist that you send payment at once”). They make the other person feel small, which will not endear you to them.• Don’t use negative tactics (insults, name-calling, bullying, sarcasm, arrogance, and verbal wrist-slapping); they produce only negative results and tarnish your company’s reputation.• Avoid the arch, pseudo-puzzled, and ineffective tone sometimes seen: “We simply cannot comprehend why someone with such a good credit rating…” “We are at a loss to understand why we have not heard from you.” “We’ve been scratching our heads…”• Don’t say anything that could be construed as libelous.Tips on Writing• Be tactful. Even people with poor credit histories often feel they are doing a good job given their circumstances. A poorly written collection letter can inspire feelings of anger, self-pity, or helplessness, none of which leads to the writing of a check.• Space collection letters. In the beginning send them monthly, immediately after a payment date is missed. Allow enough time for the customer to respond or for delays caused by illness, busy periods, or vacations. Later, send letters every ten days to two weeks. The more stubborn the account, the closer together you space the letters. When the account has a good credit history, you don’t send letters quite as often.HOW TO SAY IT® / 89• Credit and financial matters are, theoretically at least, confidential.Make every attempt to safeguard the credit information you give and receive.• Don’t send collection letters to a person’s place of business where others might open the mail. For the same reasons of privacy, don’t use postcards to send collection messages. You don’t want to embarrass your customer or leave yourself open to complaint or legal action.Special Situations• When trying to collect from a customer who reports adverse circumstances (illness, unemployment, financial reverses), work out a feasible payment program even if it is a generous one. A background check will indicate whether the person is experiencing difficulties that merit special attention. Reducing a debt by even a small amount is a success for both creditor and debtor and is worthy of your best efforts.• To remind a friend or family member of an overdue loan, help the person save face by including an excuse (“I know how busy you are…”; “I wonder if you forgot about…”; “Am I mistaken, or did we agree that you’d repay the loan September 1?”). It will be helpful if you have drawn up a loan agreement or a letter stating the terms.When writing a second time, include a photocopy of your agreement.Format• Collection letters are always typed on letterhead stationery.• Form letters are used for the first few collection letters in a series.The first can be a simple reminder with spaces to fill in the amount and due date.WORDSactionexplanationproposeadviseextendreminderarrangementliabilityrepaymentbalancemisunderstandingrequestcircumstancesnecessitaterequirecollectnonpaymentsatisfyconcernednoticesettlecooperationoutstandingstatementcreditworthinessoverdueterms90 / HOW TO SAY IT®debtoverlookedunpaiddisappointedoversighturgeembarrasspast-duePHRASESaccount past dueclear your account beforethe nextaccounts receivablestatement periodact uponcredit rating/standing/recordamount/balance due/oweddamaging to yourcredit record/appreciate hearing from youstanding/ratingat least a partial paymentdelinquent status ofyour accountbe good enough to/sodespite our notice of agood as tomonth agobehind with your paymentsdid not respondcall/direct your attention todiscuss this with youeasy payment planplease let us hear from you byescaped your attentionplease mail/send usfinal opportunitypressing need for actionfriendly reminderprompt payment/remittancehave heard nothing from youreasonable paymentarrangementhow can we work together torecourse to legal actionimmediately payablereduce your balanceimportant to resolveresolve this matterthis matterin arrearsreview of our files/your accountit is our policyshowsI understand and appreciate yourseriously delinquentposition, butseveral statements and lettersjust a reminder/to remind yousince you haven’t replied to our lastlegal action/advice/stepsletterHOW TO SAY IT® / 91let us hear from you right awayso that you can maintain your creditmail todaystandingmust hear from youspecial appealmutually satisfactory solutionstrongly suggestno activity on your accountsuggested payment plan solutionnot made a payment sinceto avoid additional expenses, delays,now due on your accountand unpleasantnessofficial noticeunacceptable delayoutstanding balancevalued customeroverdue accountwe haven’t heard from youpast-due amountwe would appreciate your sendingusperhaps you didn’t realizewithout further delaySENTENCESAfter 120 days, we normally/routinely/automatically turn an account over to our attorneys for collection.A postage-paid envelope is enclosed for your convenience.Despite our last three reminders, your account remains unpaid.Enclosed is a copy of your last statement, showing a balance of $457.89 that is ninety days overdue.I am sorry, but we are unable to extend you any more time for the payment of your outstanding balance of $896.78.If we do not hear from you at once/within the next ten days, we will be obliged to pursue other collection procedures/we will have no choice but to engage the services of a collection agency.If you have already sent your check/paid your balance of $324.56, please ignore this notice.If you haven’t already mailed in your payment, won’t you take a moment to mail it today?If your financial circumstances make it impossible to pay the full amount at this time, please let us know as I am sure that we can work out an acceptable schedule of installment payments.If your payment is not received by June 1, we will be obliged to turn your account over to the Costello Collection Agency.It is important that you take some action before this unpaid balance affects your credit rating.92 / HOW TO SAY IT®Just a reminder: your account balance of $106.87 is thirty days past due.May we have your check for $89.43 by return mail?Our records show your account to be seriously in arrears.Please call or write to make arrangements.Please forward payment in the amount of $269.89 promptly.Please mail your check by May 5 so that no future action will be necessary.Thank you for your cooperation/attention to this matter/for taking care of this at once.Thank you for your recent remittance, which has allowed us to reactivate your account.There may be a good explanation for your lack of response to our requests for payment of your overdue account—won’t you tell us about it?This matter must be resolved without further delay.Unfortunately your payment has not been received.We are disappointed not to have heard from you about your overdue balance of $1785.97.We ask for your cooperation in paying the balance due.We expect to hear from you by July 15 without fail.We have sent a number of friendly requests for payment but have had no response from you.We hope that you will take advantage of this last invitation to settle your account and to avoid further damage to your credit rating as well as the costs of any possible legal action.We look forward to hearing from you.We must know your intentions immediately.We provide prompt service, and we expect prompt payment.We resort to legal action with the greatest reluctance.We would be happy to work with you to arrange an easy payment plan suited to your circumstances.Why not take care of this matter right now?You are a much-appreciated customer, and we hope there is no problem.You may not realize that your account is ninety days past due.Your account has been turned over to Darley and Havison, our attorneys, for collection and, if necessary, legal action.Your payment of $876.23 will be appreciated.Your prompt payment will protect your good credit rating.You will want to mail your check today so that you can continue using your credit privileges.HOW TO SAY IT® / 93PARAGRAPHSEnclosed are copies of your statements, year to date. Please check them against your records, and let us know if they do not agree with ours. We show an outstanding balance of $1,236.90.The nonpayment of your balance is expensive for both of us: it is costing you your excellent credit record as well as monthly service charges and it is costing us lost revenues and extra accounting expenses.We strongly urge you to make out a check right now for the balance due on your account (a self-addressed stamped envelope is enclosed for your convenience). If you wish to discuss some financial difficulty or arrange for a special payment schedule, please call 800/555-1331 today so that we can avoid reclassifying your account as delinquent.The Locksley-Jones Collection Agency has been authorized by Elliot Lumber to collect the $980.54 past due amount on your account. According to information turned over to us by Elliot, you have not responded to requests for payment made over a period of eight months. This letter serves as your official notice that collection proceedings will begin ten days from the date of this letter unless you contact us to make some satisfactory arrangement for payment.Thank you for your payment of $763.21, received today. We are happy to be able to remove you from our collection system and to re-establish your line of credit. We do this with the understanding that you will keep your account current in the future. We hope to continue to serve you with all your plumbing and electrical needs.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Ms. Phippard:Your account is now ninety days overdue in the amount of $85.89. As you are one of our longtime customers with an excellent credit rating, we assume this is a simple oversight.Thank you for taking care of this matter promptly.Sincerely,Dear Mr. Landauer,We would like to remind you once again that we have not received any payment on your account balance of $597.45. If you need additional time or would like to arrange a special payment schedule, please call the credit department today or tomorrow at extension 91. Otherwise, we will expect to receive a check in the mail.We appreciate your prompt attention to this matter.Sincerely,94 / HOW TO SAY IT®TO: Nolan AssociatesFROM: Charney Office SuppliesDATE: March 6, 2002RE: Past-Due AccountWe have alerted you several times (see our statements of November 4 and December 7 and our letters of January 6 and February 5) that your account has a balance of $1,059.32 outstanding. Because your credit rating could be adversely affected by continuing nonpayment, we hope that you will send us something on account immediately.We need to hear from you this week concerning your plans for repayment. Thank you.Sincerely,Dear Ms. Seebach:We are concerned about your past-due account of $473.23 and your lack of response to our inquiries about it. We would like to hear from you within the next ten days so that we are not obliged to seek other, more serious means of satisfying this debt.Please consider protecting your credit rating by sending us a check promptly. You will be glad you did.Sincerely,Dear Stephen Bracebridge:Your account (# 8103-484-2329) is seriously in arrears. As we have had no response to our reminders, we are obliged to consider collecting the past-due amount of $12,489.19 with the help of a collection agency.We like to avoid this way of removing unpaid accounts from our books—both for your sake and ours. Your credit standing will be affected by such action, and we lose time and money trying to collect money that is, in all justice, owed to us.We will transfer this account to a collection agency on April 3. We would, however, be happy to work out a payment schedule with you if you will call before then.Sincerely,Dear Algy,I dislike reminding you yet again, but it’s now been six weeks since I lent you $200 “for just a few days.” If I could just forget about it, I would, but as it happens I need that money myself—right away.Shall I stop by after work to pick it up or do you want to drop it off at the house? Let me know.Sincerely,HOW TO SAY IT® / 95See also: CREDIT, FOLLOW-UP, REQUESTS.