13ComplaintsIf you don’t write to complain, you’ll never receive your order. If you do write,you’ll receive the merchandise before your angry letter reaches its destination.—ARTHUR BLOCHIf you’re writing a letter of complaint, you’re not alone. Millions write them every year. One multifoods corporation receives three hundred thousand complaining phone calls and letters per year.Some complaints can be handled by telephone. In general, however, a letter of complaint (also known as a claim letter or consumer action letter) is more effective. First, you’ve put something tangible on someone’s desk—eventually it must be dealt with. Second, you can be more tactful in a letter. Third, the details are conveyed in an accessible form (it’s hard to imagine someone on the other end of the telephone taking down dates, names, and invoice numbers as carefully as you would spell them out in a letter). Fourth, you have a record of your complaint.When you have a general, community-wide complaint, see LETTERSTO THE EDITOR. If you are responding to a complaint, see ADJUSTMENTS or even APOLOGIES.Write Letters of Complaint About• billing/collection/financial/ordering errors• children: misbehavior/damage by• community or neighborhood problems: adult bookstores/ unkempt property/noisy parties• delays: late shipment/refund/merchandise/supplies/payment• employees: incompetent/rude/inappropriate behavior• legislative problems: high taxes/unfair laws/pending bills• merchandise: defective/damaged/dangerous/overpriced/missing parts, misleading advertising, bait-and-switch tactics• mistakes, misunderstandings, personal errors• neighbors (see also NEIGHBORS)• pets: damage by/attacks by• policies: unfavorable/restrictive/discriminatory• schools: undeserved reprimands/undesirable programs 96HOW TO SAY IT® / 97How to Say It• State the problem: what it is, when you noticed it, how it inconvenienced you.• Provide factual details. For a problem with merchandise: date and place of purchase, sales slip number, description of product, serial or model number, amount paid, name of salesperson, your account number or charge card number. For a problem with a rude or inefficient service person: date and time of the incident, name of person involved (if you know it), where it occurred, names of witnesses, description of behavior. For a problem with printed inaccuracies, misstatements, or incomplete information: date, section, page, column, and incorrect material; correct data; your phone number.For a problem with the airlines: flight number, dates of flight, points of origin and termination, description of problem or incident, where and when it occurred.• Include relevant documentation: sales slips, receipts, warranties or guarantees, previous correspondence, pictures of damaged item, repair or service orders, canceled checks, contracts, paid invoices. (Send photocopies of your documents.)• Tell why it’s important to resolve your problem.• State clearly what you expect from the person or company: refund, replacement, exchange, repair. If you want money, state how much.Request a reasonable solution.• Suggest a deadline for the action.• Give your name, address, and home and work telephone numbers.• Close with your confidence in the other person’s desire to do the right thing and ability to take care of the problem to your satisfaction (“I am sure you will find a solution for this problem”; “I am confident that you will want to replace this defective answering machine”).Assume that the person who receives your letter will be helpful and let this assurance show.What Not to Say• Don’t use subjective phrases like “I want,” “I feel,” and “I need.”Figures, dates, facts, photographs, and documentation are more persuasive.• Don’t indulge in sarcasm, accusations, abuse, recriminations, blaming, smart remarks, exaggerations, or emotional outbursts—unless, of course, your only aim is to vent your anger on someone. If you want an adjustment, an apology, or other positive response, avoid antag-onizing the person who is in the best position to help you. Negative letters are not only ineffective, they make you look foolish (and feel foolish later, when you think about it).98 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Don’t be negative (“I don’t suppose you’ll do anything about this”).Assume the other person wants to be helpful (at least until you find out otherwise).• Don’t threaten to sue. This is generally seen as a bluff; people who actually sue leave this to their lawyers. You might—if you mean this—say that you are going to take the case to small claims court.Sometimes this can lead to a quick, inexpensive resolution. (Note that there are time limits on certain legal actions.)• Don’t accuse anyone of lies, unprofessionalism, cheating, stealing, or misrepresentation. You may be creating legal problems for yourself.• Don’t hint for free products or “compensation” beyond what you are due.Tips on Writing• Write your letter soon after the incident or problem; details are fresher in your mind, and your chances of getting a good response are greater.• Be brief: a one-page letter has the best chance of being read.• Be courteous: the person to whom you are writing may have had nothing to do with the error and will be more willing to help you if you are calm and reasonable. When appropriate, include positive remarks: why you chose that product, how long you’ve used the company’s services or products, that you think this incident must be an exception to the rule.• Focus on one complaint or issue per letter. When you report in the same letter a rude salesperson, insufficient parking, a mispriced item, and a can opener too dull to open anything, you are likely to get (at most) a blanket apology and no particular action on any of the individual problems.• Place more emphasis on how the problem can be resolved and less emphasis on the details of the mix-up, your reactions and feelings, and what a disaster it has all been. Your letter should be oriented toward resolving the problem or arriving at a solution.• Help the other person save face. If you act as though only your threats and string-pulling are bringing about a settlement, you deny the other person their sense of themselves as decent, generous people.• If your complaint has several components (list of ordered items missing, series of events), set off these items in a numbered or bulleted list.• Keep a record of every phone call, letter, or other action you take, along with the dates, the names and titles of those you dealt with, and a summary of the results.HOW TO SAY IT® / 99• Keep the originals of all correspondence, canceled checks, sales slips, and supporting documents.• Don’t send copies to third parties when you first write a company; give it a chance to settle the problem. If you receive no satisfaction, subsequent letters can be copied to regulatory agencies, trade associations, or consumer advocate offices. On your letter to the company, use “cc:” to indicate those who are receiving a copy.• “Complain to one who can help you.” (Yugoslavian proverb) There’s nothing less effective than writing a great letter to the wrong person. In general, send a complaint letter to a specific person. A letter addressed to nobody in particular ends up on nobody’s list of responsibilities. When writing to lawmakers or government officials, check the library reference department for listings inU.S. GovernmentManual(new edition every year),Who’s Who in American Politics,and state and federal handbooks and directories.Federal Information Centers,which lists contacts across the country when you need assistance from the federal government, is available free from Consumer Information Center, Pueblo, CO 81009. When writing businesses, obtain names and titles of company officials by calling the company or from directories of U.S. businesses in the reference section of your library. Addressing a letter to the company’s consumer affairs department is a good choice; these departments specialize in problems like yours. If you receive no satisfaction from the company, pursue the matter with: your local Better Business Bureau; a local, county, or state consumer agency; the consumer division of the state attorney general’s office; your state representatives; a relevant consumer group; trade association; the appropriate regulatory government agency. When appealing to one of these groups, include a description of the problem, a list of the steps you’ve taken, and the names and titles of those you’ve contacted. If you’re involved in a disagreement with a professional, write the state board that licenses the person.•The Consumer Action Handbookis a useful 144-page publication updated yearly and available free by writing: Handbook, Federal Consumer Information Center, Pueblo, CO 81009 or by calling 800/688-9889 (for weekly updates click on Handbook at www.pueblo.gsa.gov).In addition to preventive advice (consumer tips on car repair, purchase and leasing; shopping from home; avoiding consumer and investment fraud; home improvement and financing; choosing and using credit cards wisely), the handbook tells you where to direct complaints, listing contact information for national consumer organizations, corporate consumer relations departments, automobile manufacturers, better business bureaus throughout the country, trade associations, third-party dispute resolution programs, federal agencies as well as state and local consumer protection offices. You can also go to ht-tp://www.pueblo.gsa.gov/complaintresources.htm where the Federal Consumer Information Center offers a list of resources for consumer100 / HOW TO SAY IT®complaints about medicines, drugs, and medical devices; health clubs and exercise equipment; veterinary products; airline baggage and service; auto dealers; banking; online services, spam or junk e-mail; telephone service.• If you write many complaint letters, you might likeShocked, Appalled, and Dismayed! How to Write Letters of Complaint That Get Resultsby Ellen Phillips.Special Situations• In a dispute about a credit-card purchase, contact the credit card company to withhold payment while the problem is being resolved (read the information on the back of your statement for details). Most companies have forms for this, asking for your name, account number, credit card statement reference number, amount, store where purchased, and description of the item and the problem.• To protest an increase in rent or in auto, medical, or homeowner insurance, include: name, address, telephone number, apartment or policy number, years you have been renting or insured with that company, history of rates, reasons for your objection. Ask that someone call you to discuss the matter.• When there are issues with your child’s school, assume nothing at the outset. Begin your letter with questions: “Can you tell me…?”“Is it true that…?” Too often, misunderstandings crop up somewhere between school and home. Clarify the issues before asking for changes or apologies.• When schools relay complaints to parents, phone calls are the first avenue of communication, but sometimes letters must be sent. In writing parents, the school official’s points of reference will be “tact”and “fact.” State what happened briefly and objectively. Suggest a date and time for a meeting or ask that the parent call you. Enclose a copy of the school regulations the child violated or refer the parent to the student handbook. State what action is being taken or may be taken by the school.• When you are one of a large group protesting an action, product, service, or corporate behavior, send individual, personalized letters rather than form letters or group-generated complaints. Organizations are more likely to respond to one well-written, original letter than to hundreds of mimeographed postcards. In some cases, the great number of complaints is persuasive, but in general you may be wasting time and postage on mass-produced complaints.• When writing to an elected official to recommend a course of action, mention the issue or legislation you’re writing about in the first sentence or in a subject line (“Re: property taxes” or “Subject: HR4116”). State your opinion clearly (“I strongly disapprove of…/IHOW TO SAY IT® / 101urge you to…”). Give reasons for your position. If there are several, list them separately, set off by numbers, asterisks, or bullets. Indicate the course of action you would like the person to take or the response that you expect. Offer to serve as a resource if the issue is something you are particularly knowledgeable about. End with an expression of appreciation for their interest and time.• Sometimes apologies are necessary on both sides of a dispute.Even when you have a legitimate complaint, it’s possible that you have in some small way aggravated the situation. Making your own apology is not only honest (if called for) but is often helpful in eliciting the response you want.Format• Business letterhead, business-personal stationery, or personal letterhead are all good choices for a complaint letter.• Type the letter if possible. If you must handwrite it, be sure it is legible and neat.WORDSactioninaccuratemisprintresolveadjustmentinadequatemisquoterestoreagreed-uponinappropriatemisrepresentedshort-sightedcompensationincidentmissingslipshodconcernedincompletemisstatementthoughtlessdamagedinconsistentmistakeuncooperativedefectiveinconvenientmisunderstand-unfortunateingdisagreementincorrectnonfunctioningunfoundeddisappointedinexperiencedoff-puttingunjustifiabledispleasedinferioromissionunpleasantdisputeinsufficientoverchargedunprofessionaldissatisfactionlaxoverestimatedunqualifiedembarrassingmisapprehen-overlookedunreasonablesionexasperatingmiscalculationoversightunreliableexperiencemisconceptionregrettableunsatisfactoryfaultmisconstruedreimburseunsound102 / HOW TO SAY IT®flawmishandledremakeuntidygrievancemisinformedrepairuntrueill-advisedmisinterpretedrepayunwarrantedimpolitemisleadingreplacePHRASESa mix-up in my ordercorrect your recordsappealing to you for helpdefective upon arrivalare you aware thatdoes not meet our performanceas a longtime customerstandardscall to your immediate attentionexpect to hear from you soonhas not met my expectationsmay not be aware thathope to resolve this problemnot up to your usual high standardsI am concerned aboutregister a complaint aboutI feel certain you would want toserious omission/problemknow thatunder the conditions of the warrantyit has come to my attention thatunpleasant incidentit is with reluctance that I mustunsatisfactory performanceinform youwe were unhappy withit was disconcerting to find thatwith all possible speedI was displeased/distressed/dis-would like credit forturbed/offended/disappointed byyou have generally given us excel-lentI wish to be reimbursed forservice, butI would like to alert you toSENTENCESAnything you can do to speed matters up/resolve this problem will be greatly appreciated.Here are the facts.I am confident that you can resolve this.I am expecting the courtesy of a prompt reply.I am writing regarding my last bill, invoice # G4889, dated August 15, 2002.HOW TO SAY IT® / 103I believe that an apology is due us.I expect an adjustment to be made as soon as possible.I hope you will take this complaint in the helpful spirit in which it is meant.I know you will want to see that such an incident does not occur again.I like your product but I object strongly to your advertising.I’m concerned about Coach Ingelsant’s angry, abusive manner with the ju-nior soccer players.I’m confident that we can resolve this matter to our mutual satisfaction.I regret/am sorry to inform you of the following unpleasant situation.I strongly oppose your position on this weapons system.It is my understanding that it will be repaired/replaced at your expense.I will send a check for the balance as soon as I receive a corrected statement.I wish to receive credit on my account for this item.I would appreciate a telephone call from you about this situation.I would like a refund in the amount of $49.99.I would like to clear up this misunderstanding as soon as possible.Let me know what is being done.Please call the principal’s office to arrange a meeting with the principal, the school counselor, and myself regarding Christie’s suspension.Please contact me within three business days to make arrangements for rectifying the situation.Please let me hear from you at your earliest convenience.Please let me know what options are available to me.Thank you for your prompt assistance with this situation/problem.The following situation has come to my attention.The most satisfactory solution for us would be for you to send us a replacement lamp and reimburse us for the cost of mailing the defective lamp back to you.There was too little feedback to us during the design of the #2 unit.This product has been unsatisfactory in several respects.We experienced the following problem in your store/restaurant/hotel last week.We would like to resolve this situation without delay/without having recourse to the Better Business Bureau or Small Claims Court.Will you please check on this?104 / HOW TO SAY IT®PARAGRAPHSI received the leather patchwork travel bag today (copies of catalog page and invoice enclosed), but the matching billfold was not included.Please send me one as soon as possible, in burgundy to match the bag.Thank you.Five weeks ago I mailed you my check for our stay at the Vörös Csillig in Budapest, and I have not yet received confirmation of our reservations.As the rest of my itinerary depends on whether we are able to stay in Budapest, I would appreciate an immediate phone call from you.Channel 12’s insistence on running inappropriate programming between 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m., when many young people are watching, means that this family at least will no longer turn to Channel 12 for any of its news, entertainment, or programs.Please find enclosed a bracelet, a necklace, and a pair of earrings. We would appreciate either repair or replacement of these items. The bracelet has a broken clasp, the gold on the earrings appears to be chipped, and the silver finish is overlaying the gemstone on the necklace.In each case, dissatisfied customers of our store returned the items to us. Your immediate attention to this matter will be greatly appreciated.I’m enclosing a photocopy of a collection letter I received from your agency. This is the sixth letter I have received about this account. Although my first initial and last name are the same as the person responsible for it, we have nothing else in common. I marked each of the earlier letters “incorrect address” and returned them to you. Please verify the correct address of your correspondent. I will expect a letter from you stating that my name and address have been removed from your files and that my credit rating has not been affected by this error.My order (# 578942-E) for two dozen Shipley short wave radios, placed three weeks ago, has not yet been received. I was told to expect them within the week. Will you please check to see if the order has gone astray?We need them immediately.I object to the tactics used in your telephone sales efforts. Today a caller identified herself as someone from the credit bureau. After hearing the words “credit bureau” I stayed attentively on the line. It was only after several minutes of trying to understand what was wrong with my credit rating that I realized I was being asked to buy life insurance. I think your approach is deceitful. Enclosed is a copy of the letter I have written to the Better Business Bureau complaining of it.Thank you for your fifty-six-page report on your department’s activities over the past six months. The graphics are outstanding. However, while there is much to reflect on in the text, I find many questions unanswered and several important issues left unaddressed. I would like to discuss with you the kinds of information I need to see in a departmental semiannual report. Please phone my secretary to set up an appointment.HOW TO SAY IT® / 105Imagine our embarrassment when we served one of your Paramount Hams for Easter, and none of our guests were able to eat it because it was excessively salty. I would like a refund for the inedible ham (label and store receipt enclosed). Also, can you give me any good reasons for ever buying another Trotter and Duff Paramount Ham? I don’t like writing someone off on the basis of a single error, but one bad ham is one too many.The Abbeville Faxphone 200 that I ordered from you two weeks ago receives documents but will not transmit them. Several phone calls to your service department (I was, of course, unable to fax them) about this serious problem have been unhelpful. The only information I was given was that I was not to return the machine without prior approval. Please send such approval immediately.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Mr. Tallant:As you know, a great deal of our work is coordinated with Harvey Crane Construction. They must complete their paving and other operations before the median work on Pearl Street can begin.I have seen no progress on their part for about a month. Their delays mean that we incur such damages as loss of production, lower profits, winter protection costs, remobilization, accelerated schedules (overtime), and barricade rental—to name just a few items.As these costs and damages will necessarily be passed on to you, you may want to check into the situation.Sincerely,Dear Mr. Thornton,This is the third time we have contacted you about your dog, Buck.The neighborhood children continue to be frightened of him, and refuse to play outdoors when he is in your yard. There have been several reports of him snapping at the children.When would be a good time to discuss this situation with you? We would like to come to some agreement without going to the authorities.I hope to hear from you very soon.Sincerely yours,Dear cummings writing machine company,i would like an immediate replacement for this typewriter. i bought it on june 3 of this year from ‘tulips’ in cambridge, massachusetts (sales slip enclosed), but, as you can see, it will not produce capital letters.the ‘tulips’ people tell me that the manufacturer is responsible for all106 / HOW TO SAY IT®defects. please let me know at once how you plan to supply me with a typewriter that types capital letters.yours truly,Dear Mr. Abednego,When I bought my first insurance policy with the Independent W.Diddlesex Insurance Company, I was told that buying my auto, homeowners, and life insurances from you would guarantee me a 20%reduction over the rates I would normally pay separately. Now that I have switched my life insurance to Diddlesex to obtain this complete coverage, I find that I am paying substantially the same rates as before.Will you please check to see why I am not getting the lower rates, and let me know as soon as possible?Sincerely,Dear Mr. Bellman:We have come to expect a high degree of judgment and integrity from the Calcutta Tape and Sealing Wax Office. It was therefore as surprising as it was distressing when the last shipment was found to be substandard.Substitutions were made without our permission—invariably a substitution of an inferior product at the original price. In two instances, quantities were not the quantities ordered (they were smaller), with no equivalent adjustment made on the invoice. I am enclosing a copy of our order, a copy of your invoice, and a list of what we actually received. I would appreciate hearing from you immediately on what we can do not only to remedy the current shipment but also to ensure that this doesn’t happen again.Sincerely,Dear Mr. Atterbury:Before scheduling an appointment with you to discuss the incorporation of my business, I asked your secretary about your legal fees. He told me you charge $100 an hour. I was therefore very surprised to received a bill for $350 when I spent no more than one hour with you.I will appreciate an explanation of my bill. Thank you.Sincerely,Dear Ms. Scanlon,We have been renting Apartment 206 at 1935 Chicago Avenue for the past four years and have been pleased with our situation until just recently, when new tenants moved into Apartment 306.We have spoken to Mr. Lonigan and Ms. Branahan about the frequent parties, arguments, and loud noises after 11:00 p.m., and we have alsoHOW TO SAY IT® / 107asked the building manager to do what she could. However, we think you need to look into this situation yourself.Please let us know what we can expect.Sincerely yours,Dear Wheatley Office Products:On April 3, 1 purchased your four-drawer, self-locking EZ-Open File Cabinet, serial number 007800, from your Wheatley outlet on Broadway.I paid a sale price of $329.99 plus tax for the unit.Unfortunately, the file cabinet does not function as claimed. It self-locks arbitrarily; half the time it does, half the time it doesn’t, and no one is able to predict just when it will do which. The one-touch unlocking mechanism does not work at all, which means that usually the drawers have to be unlocked manually with the “emergency only” key. Even when the drawers are not locked, they are difficult to open because of a design problem with overlapping inside shelving.Mr. Denny Swinton, who sold me the unit, informs me that because the unit was on sale I am unable to return it. I am certain, however, that, sale price or no, I have a right to expect that the unit will perform as promised.I would like to hear within the next several days that a truck will be coming from Wheatley to pick up the defective unit and that my purchase price will be refunded.Sincerely,Dear Dr. Blenkinsop,As you know, we have been satisfied patients of yours for the past six years. However, I wonder if you are aware that the condition of your waiting room is off-putting. The carpet rarely appears vacuumed, the plastic plants are thick with dust, and the magazines and children’s playthings are strewn about, apparently untouched from one of our visits to the next. Hygiene seems particularly important in a healthcare environment, and, although I know what an excellent physician you are, I can’t help worrying about how clean everything else is.I hope you find this letter helpful rather than unpleasant—it was written with the best intentions.Sincerely,See also: ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS, ADJUSTMENTS, APOLOGIES, NEIGHBORS, ORDERS, RESPONSES.