14CongratulationsTo hear how special and wonderful we are is endlessly enthralling.—GAIL SHEEHYSome of the most delightful words we receive—right up there with “I love you”—is the letter that begins, “Congratulations!” Because it is rarely obligatory and because its contents are wholly positive, the congratulations note adds a glow to any personal or business relationship. And you don’t have to wait for big news to send one. Small landmarks and successes have a sweetness all their own, and the recipient of your note will long remember your thoughtfulness.Occasions That Call for Letters of Congratulations• achievements/awards/honors/prizes/speeches/publications/recognition• adoption or birth of child• anniversaries: business/years of service/wedding (see ANNIVERSARIES)• birthdays (see ANNIVERSARIES)• business: good business year, new store, new account, new contract, merger, opening own business, securing a franchise• changes: new car/home/job• customers: good news, major life events• election to office: public/organization or club/professional society/social group• employees’ work• engagement (see WEDDINGS)• graduation• jobs: new job, promotion, new title• loan payment (see CREDIT)• religious milestones: christening/circumcision/bar mitzvah/bat mitzvah/ first communion/confirmation/ordination/taking of religious vows• retirement• sales messages: being selected to receive special offer/credit limit raised (see SALES)108HOW TO SAY IT® / 109• wedding (see WEDDINGS)How to Say It• Use the word “congratulations” early in your note.• Mention the reason (graduation, promotion, honor, baby).• Tell how happy, pleased, proud, or impressed you are—and why.“The art of pleasing consists in being pleased.” (William Hazlitt)• If appropriate, tell how you learned about the good news. If you read it in the newspaper, enclose the clipping or a photocopy of it.• Relate an anecdote, shared memory, or reflection that has some bearing on the occasion.• In closing, wish the person continued success and happiness; express your confidence in a bright future; assure them of your affection, love, admiration, warmth, interest, delight, pleasure, or continued business support.What Not to Say• Don’t indulge in excessive flattery (“watch out, Corporate America—here she comes,” “I can see that I’ll soon be writing to congratulate you on the Nobel Prize”). It makes people uncomfortable. A simple “Congratulations!” and a few personal remarks bring quite enough joy.• Don’t make your congratulatory note do double duty: don’t include questions, information, sales messages, or work matters that aren’t relevant to the good news.• Don’t compare the recipient’s news to something you once did or to something you read in the paper; let the person enjoy a moment in the sun—alone.• Don’t talk about “luck” when congratulating someone; it implies that chance rather than talent and hard work was responsible for the success.• Beware of inadvertently putting a negative spin on your congratulations. Instead of “I never would have thought you could do it” or“After all this time, you finally did it,” say “I’m so impressed with your energy and determination” or “Congratulations on your hard work and perseverance.”Tips on Writing• Written congratulations are optional except when you have received an announcement of personal news (a graduation, for example).110 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Write soon after hearing the news. Congratulations are best served up warm. If you’re late, apologize only briefly.• Even when you’re close to the person to whom you’re writing, make your congratulatory letter brief and somewhat formal; this increases its impact.Special Situations• Sending notes of congratulations to customers, clients, colleagues, and other business associates about their good news (births, weddings, promotions, new business) is a thoughtful goodwill gesture.• When a branch office, department, or division has enjoyed a collective success, write to them as a group, naming each employee (“Congratulations on surpassing this year’s collection goal/securing the new account/your speedy inventory reduction/a new sales volume record/a smooth departmental reorganization”).• Your response to news of an engagement is pleasant and congratulatory. If you have reservations about the relationship, deal with them in person or don’t write at all; cautionary or qualified congratulations are worse than none. Traditionally “congratulations” were offered to the engaged man and “best wishes” to the engaged woman; you may properly use either expression for women or men.• The news of a divorce can elicit a simple acknowledgment, a letter of sympathy, or a letter of congratulations. The latter is sent rarely, and then only to someone you know well. You might, however, want to congratulate someone not on the divorce itself but on surviving the upheaval of a difficult period.• Baby announcements inspire some of the happiest congratulations.When the baby is premature, send congratulations, gifts, and good wishes in the normal way; do not wait to see how the baby does. In the event of multiple births, don’t ask if the woman took fertility pills and don’t say or imply, “You poor things!” Just say “Congratulations!”When a child is born with medical problems or a disability, write that you’ve heard they have a new little one, that you are thinking of them.Avoid commercial “new baby” cards and conventional congratulations on the one hand, and expressions of sympathy on the other. Some of the unfortunate remarks that these new parents hear include: “You’re not going to keep it, are you?” “I think you should sue the hospital.”“Is one of you a carrier for this?” “Maybe the baby won’t live; that would be best all around.” “Whose fault was it?” “Did you drink while you were pregnant?” “I guess it could have been worse.” “God only sends burdens to those who can bear them.” Until you know how the parents are feeling (devastated, concerned but optimistic, happy to have the child at any price), don’t reveal your feelings—they may be wide of the mark. Later, when you know how the parents are feeling,HOW TO SAY IT® / 111you can respond on a more emotional level. When congratulating someone on an adoption, do not write, “I’ll bet you get pregnant now.”People adopt for reasons other than fertility and adoption is not, in any case, a cure for infertility (pregnancies occur after adoption at approximately the same rates as they occur in couples dealing with problems of infertility). Don’t ask about the child’s background or biological/birth parents (never write “real parents”; you are writing to the real parents). Don’t say that you “admire” your friends for adopting anymore than you would “admire” a biological parent for having a child. Whatdoyou write? Ask the parents to tell you about the child and the great arrival day. Say that you can’t wait to come visit, and wish them much happiness.• Sometimes a “congratulations” approach is used in sales letters (see SALES).Format• Most congratulations take the form of a note—on personal stationery, foldovers, or notecards.• Commercial cards are available for almost every occasion that calls for congratulations. However, use the inside or back of the card to add your own message.• In some contexts (business, politics, clubs and organizations), congratulations may be sent on business letterhead, business-personal paper, or memo stationery, depending on the degree of closeness between sender and recipient and the importance of the good news.• Some congratulations may be e-mailed, particularly in office settings among colleagues.WORDSa c c o m p l i s h -excellentleadershipsuccessmentachievementexceptionallegendarysuperbadmireexcitingmeaningfulsuperiorapplaudextraordinarymemorablesuperlativeappreciatefeatmilestonetalentassetfinestmomentousthrilledbrilliantforesightoccasiontraditioncelebrationfutureoutstandingtremendouscheergenerouspeerlesstribute112 / HOW TO SAY IT®commendgeniusperformancetriumphcomplimentgiftperseveranceunforgettablecongratulategratifyingpleasureuniquecontributionhappyprogressunparalleledcreativeheroprolificunrivaleddazzlinghonorproudvaluabledébutimaginativerecognizevictorydedicatedimpressedresourcefulvisiondelightedincomparablerespectedvitaldependableinnovativesalutewell-deserveddistinguishedinspiringsatisfyingwinnereffortinvaluablesensationalenterprisinginventiveskillfulesteemkudosspecialPHRASESaccept my heartiest congratulationsmany congratulations and muchonhappinessachieved your goalsoffer my warmest/sincerest/hearti-estall possible joy and happinesscongratulationsan impressive record/achievementred letter dayanother successrejoice with youbeyond all expectationssharing in your happinesscheerful/cheering newssignificant/valuable contributioncontinued health and happiness/sincere wishes for continued successsuccessspectacular achievementcouldn’t let this happy occasion gotake great pleasure in sendingby withoutcongratulations to youdelighted/happy/thrilled to hear/take this opportunity to wish youread/receive the newsevery happinessgood/great/sensational/joyful/were thrilled to hear aboutthrilling newswishing you all the best/high quality of your workmuch success/continued successHOW TO SAY IT® / 113I especially liked the way youwith all good wishes to you in yourimpressed with this latest award/new venturehonor/prize/achievementwonderful ability to get thingsin awe of all that you’ve donedone—and done welljoins me in sending best/good/your important contributionwarm wishesyou’ve done a superb job ofknow that you’re held in high es-teemSENTENCESBaxter called this evening to tell us that the two of you are engaged to be married, and we wanted to tell you immediately how happy we are for you.Best wishes from all of us.Congratulations on opening your own chiropractic office!Congratulations on the littlest Woodley—may she know health, happiness, and love all her life.Good news travels fast!Hear hear!I am almost as delighted as you are with this recent turn of events.I couldn’t be happier if it had happened to me.I hear wonderful things about you.I hope we will enjoy many more years of doing business together.I just heard the news—congratulations!I’m proud to know you/to be your friend!I’m so impressed!It was a splendid performance/great triumph/brilliant speech.I understand that congratulations are in order.I’ve just heard from Choi Nam-Sun that two of your poems will be included in the next issue—congratulations!I very much admire your organizational skills/perseverance/many achievements/ingenuity/calm in the face of difficulties.I wanted you to know how proud and happy I was to hear that your short will be shown at the Brooklyn Film Festival.I wish I could be with you to share in this happy occasion.My hat’s off to you!114 / HOW TO SAY IT®My heartiest congratulations to you both.My thoughts are with you today as you celebrate.My warmest congratulations on your graduation from Columbia!This is the best news I’ve heard in a long time.We are pleased with your work on ethics-in-government legislation.Well done!We’ve all benefited from your expertise and creativity.What terrific news!With best wishes for fair weather and smooth sailing in the years ahead.You certainly haven’t let the grass grow under your feet.Your reputation had preceded you, and I see you intend to live up to it.You’ve done it again!You’ve topped everyone in the store in sales this past month—congratulations!PARAGRAPHSI was delighted (although not surprised) to hear that you won the Schubert piano concerto competition this year. Congratulations! I’ve watched you develop as a fine pianist over the years, and it is a thrill to see you rewarded for your talent—and, above all, for your hard work.Please accept the congratulations of everyone here at Avonia-Bunn Title Insurance Company on your Outstanding Service Award. Your industry, your attention to detail, and your creative problem-solving have been an inspiration to all of us.You remind me of something I read long ago, written by Elinor Smith:“It had long since come to my attention that people of accomplishment rarely sat back and let things happen to them. They went out and happened to things.”I well remember your diffident debut twenty-five years ago. Who would have guessed that your “awkward little offspring” would grow to be the successful business it is today?In the past ten years, the company has grown beyond all recognition—a complete line of new products, computerization of all departments, financial growth beyond our wildest expectations—and wherever there has been innovation, development, progress, you’ve been in the front ranks. We wouldn’t be the company we are today without you. Please accept the enclosed bonus as a sign of our gratitude and appreciation for ten wonderful years.Aunt Evalina told us about your “dramatic” success. Congratulations on what was evidently a stunning performance! I’m so proud of you,HOW TO SAY IT® / 115not only for this latest accomplishment, but for all your hard work of the past four years.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Professor Arronax,Heartiest congratulations on the recently published accounts of your discoveries. I have read them with the greatest fervor and admiration.With all best wishes, I amFaithfully yours,Dear Briggs,I was happy to hear about your promotion to division credit manager.Let’s celebrate!Your cousin,Dear Raoul,Congratulations on being named this year’s Outstanding Manager.Having recently visited one of your division branches, I know that you very much deserve this honor.I’m looking forward to seeing you at the May banquet when you accept your plaque. Until then, best wishes.Sincerely,Dear Governor Peck,Congratulations on your landslide election. All of us who campaigned for you in this area are proud and pleased to have been part of your victory.Please accept my best wishes for a distinguished, productive, and happy term of office.Respectfully yours,Dear Mr. Dodsworth:Congratulations on the opening of your newest branch of the Revelation Motor Company. We have always appreciated doing business with you, and expect to enjoy it even more now that your new office is only two blocks from us.Best wishes for happiness and success to all of you at Revelation.Sincerely,Dear Synövé,116 / HOW TO SAY IT®Congratulations on receiving the Granliden award! That’s terrific. I was so happy for you when I saw the announcement in the paper.I hope everything else in your life is going as well.Best,Dear William,I’ve just heard from Katherine that you are finally a full-fledged chemical engineer—congratulations! I’ve admired you as I’ve watched your struggles these past few years to acquire an education. Katherine and I said some rather flattering things about you and concluded that you’re going to go far in this world.My best wishes to you for a bright and happy future.Fondly,Dear Mr. Rochester,Congratulations on your election to the Thornfield School Board. I hope that after running such a vigorous and inspiring campaign you still have enough energy to carry out some of your sound and needed ideas.Be assured of our continued support, and do not hesitate to call on us if we can do anything to help.With best wishes,Dear Ms. Hubbard,Congratulations on an outstanding first year at Grattan Public Relations, Inc. A growing company like ours needs and appreciates people with your energy, expertise, and intuition. We are all predicting a brilliant future for you.Congratulations and best wishes.Sincerely,Dear Helen and Arthur,So little Laura has arrived at last. It has been such a long process, and I know it’s been hard for you wondering if there would ever be an end to the red tape and waiting. But all that’s over now, and the three of you can begin your life together.From what I hear, this is definitely an adoption made in heaven. I know that Laura will add a great deal to the joy you two already find in each other.With every good wish,See also: APPRECIATION, EMPLOYMENT, FAMILY, GOODWILL, RESPONSES, SALES, WEDDINGS.