15Letters That Serve As ContractsThe degree of miscommunication regarding what’s been agreed upon in abusiness dealtends to increase in direct proportion to the amount of money involved.—ROBERT J. RINGERA letter can serve as a short, informal contract. Whether you need an attorney to check such letters depends on the complexity of the contract and the possible negative outcomes if it is poorly written.Contract Letters Deal with• agreements• cancellations of agreements/contracts• changes in terms• leases• rentals• work ordersHow to Say It• Identify the nature of the contract in a subject line (“Re: Tuckpointing at 1711 Grismer Avenue”).• Begin with a phrase such as “This letter will serve as a contract between…”• Give names and addresses of both parties to the agreement or contract.• State what each party will give and receive.• Specify dates by which the work must be completed and by which payment must be received.• Mention whether and under what conditions the contract may be canceled.• Specify date by which you expect the letter to be signed and returned.• Leave lines and blank spaces at the bottom for both parties to sign and date the letter.117118 / HOW TO SAY IT®What Not to Say• Don’t include anything that doesn’t bear on the contract; this is a focused document.• Don’t use legal-sounding terminology to make a contract look more legal (unless you are a lawyer). Use simple, standard English to avoid later charges that the other party “didn’t understand” part of the contract.Tips on Writing• Before writing, list all factors that will protect your agreement (for example, time limits, price ceilings, independent inspector). Have someone familiar with the situation double-check it for you.• Don’t be afraid to write as though you were speaking. Use personal pronouns and ordinary grammar and sentence structure (“I promise to…in exchange for…”). On the other hand, maintain a businesslike tone to inspire confidence and to strengthen the letter’s use as a contract.• The main body of the contract can be as short as a paragraph or long enough to be divided into many paragraphs. In the latter case, organize the information into clear, logical units.Special Situations• If timing is important to your agreement, contract, or the cancellation of either, send your letter return receipt requested so that you can verify the date that the letter was received. If your lease requires you to give thirty days’ notice, you will be glad to have a receipt stating that the notice was received within the time limit.• When submitting a proposal that you expect to be accepted, turn it into a contract or binding agreement by adding at the bottom, “Approved by [signature] on [date] by [printed name and title].”• When lending money to family or friends, all parties will benefit from having a letter contract spelling out amounts, dates, and responsibilities.Format• All contracts and letters dealing with contracts are typed on business letterhead, personal letterhead stationery, or good bond stationery.HOW TO SAY IT® / 119• Forms are used when your business habitually contracts for the same kind of work.WORDSagreementconditionsnegotiationtransactionarrangementconfirmobligationsunderstandingassureconformprovisionsunderwritebindconsentsettlementverifycertifyendorsestipulationwarrantclausesguaranteetermsPHRASESagreed-to termsmutual satisfactionarticles of the agreementon condition thatas of the agreed-upon dateplease sign and datecomply withreach an understandingconsidered complete whenreturn this letter byeffective as of/untilterms listed belowin return, you agree toSENTENCESEnclosed is a check for $500, which will serve as earnest money for apartment# 37 in the 131 Park Drive building.In the event of disagreement about the quality of the work, the dispute will be submitted to independent arbitration with costs being shared equally by both parties.Note: This contract may be withdrawn by us if not accepted within 10 days.Paragraph N of the contract is irrelevant to the matter at hand; please delete it and initial and return this letter.The enclosed forward currency contract constitutes an agreement to deliver or receive a present stated amount of currency at a future specified date.This letter serves as a contract between Madge Allen and Cain & Sons for sheetrock and plaster repair to the property at 35 James Court, with the following conditions and specifications.This letter will serve as an informal agreement between us covering the120 / HOW TO SAY IT®period from January 1, 2002, to December 31, 2003, for the following services.PARAGRAPHSI am happy to lend you the money to buy the truck. As we discussed, you will repay the $9,000 loan over a period of 36 months in the amount of $250 per month. There will be no interest. Please sign and date the second copy of this letter and return it to me.I agree to translate your Moroccan contracts, letters, faxes, and other messages for the fee of $35 per hour. I further agree to complete the outstanding translations by February 10. You will pay messenger service fees between your office and mine, parking fees for consultations at your offices, and postage for mail or overnighting services.Acceptance of contract: The above prices, specifications, and conditions are satisfactory and are hereby accepted. You are authorized to do the work as specified. Payment will be made upon completion. Date of acceptance: May 6, 2004. Authorized signature: Bernard BoweriSAMPLE LETTERSDear Mr. Bowling,As required by our lease, we hereby give you thirty days’ notice of our intention to move from Apartment 2 at 619 Fourth Street.Please call any evening after 6:00 p.m. to let us know when you need to show the apartment.Our rent deposit of $450 will need to be refunded to us as we have not damaged the apartment in any way during our tenancy.We have enjoyed our two years here very much, and will be sorry to move.Sincerely yours,Dear Ms. Hart:Pryke Financial Services, Inc. will be happy to act as Investment Adviser to the Collins Foundation and, as such, will assist with cash management and investment of foundation funds with the exception of the initial investment of the bond issue proceeds from certain bond issues.We agree to provide the following services: 1.A complete review and analysis of the Collins Foundation’s financial structure and conditions.2.The preparation of written investment objectives outlining preferable investments, portfolio goals, risk limits, and diversification possibilities.HOW TO SAY IT® / 1213.The establishment of preferred depository or certificate arrangements with banks or savings and loans.4.Soliciting bids for guaranteed investment agreements.5.Monitoring fund transfers, verifying receipt of collateral, completing documentation.6.Working with a governmental securities dealer to execute governmental security transactions.7.Meeting with your treasurer and financial adviser periodically and with your board of directors as requested.8.Providing monthly portfolio status reports with sufficient detail for accounting and recording purposes.Pryke Financial Services, Inc. will submit quarterly statements for services. Our fees will be billed in advance and calculated by multiply-ing.000375 times the Collins Foundation’s invested portfolio at the beginning of each calendar quarter (.0015 annually). Fees will be adjusted at the end of each quarter to reflect the rate times the average invested balance for the previous quarter. Adjustments will be included in the next billing.Fees can be reviewed and adjusted annually on the anniversary date of this contract.This agreement will run from June 1, 2004, through June 1, 2005, but may be canceled by either party without cause with thirty days’ written notice.Sincerely,Grace BloomPresidentThe above agreement is accepted by the Collins Foundation (blanks for date, signatures, titles).Dear Mr. Golspie,This letter will serve as an informal agreement between us. On Feb. 7from 4:00–5:00 p.m. you agree to provide entertainers for my daughter’s birthday party consisting of one clown, one magician, and one facepainter. I understand that the clown and magician portion of the entertainment will last about 20 minutes, and the facepainter will remain for the rest of the hour.I agree to pay you a $50 deposit (check enclosed) and the remaining $200 on Feb. 7. As requested a room will be available for your use. Also enclosed is a detailed map with directions to our home.We’re all looking forward to this, adults as well as children!See also: ACCEPTANCES, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ADJUSTMENTS, ORDERS.