16Cover LettersIt is estimated that the average piece of business correspondence gets less thanthirty seconds of the reader’s attention. Even a truly great cover letter will notget much more.—MARTIN YATECover letters (also called transmittal letters) accompany résumés, application forms, manuscripts, documents, product literature, payments, charitable contributions, contracts, reports, samples, data, and other materials.They may be as short as two sentences, telling what is enclosed and why, or as long as two pages, highlighting important points in the enclosures, explaining something that is not immediately obvious, or developing a sales message to accompany the report, sample, document, information, or package.The main purpose of the cover letter is to direct the reader quickly and persuasively to the enclosed materials.Distinct from a cover letter, the cover sheet accompanies a fax and lists the person sending the fax, the person receiving it, the fax number, and the number of pages being faxed (see FAXES).Cover Letters Accompany• application forms• brochures/booklets/catalogs/pamphlets (see SALES)• checks unaccompanied by statements or invoices• contracts/agreements• contributions to charitable causes• documents• faxes (see FAXES)• information/instructions• manuscripts• product literature (see SALES)• proposals• questionnaires• résumés• samples (see SALES)• surveys122HOW TO SAY IT® / 123How to Say It• Address your letter to a specific person.• State what is enclosed, attached, or mailed under separate cover. If there are several items, list them. Give number and type of items (“three brochures”), amount of payment, or other descriptive information.• Mention why you’re sending the material (in response to a request, to introduce the person to a new product, for their information).• If necessary, explain what the item is and how to interpret or use it.• Summarize the main points of the enclosure, highlight strong qualifications on your résumé, or otherwise orient the reader toward the most important issues of your material.• Tell what response you’re expecting from the other person or what future action you’ll be taking.• Include your name, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and fax number.• Close with an expression of appreciation or a forward-looking statement.What Not to Say• Don’t duplicate the enclosed material. Summarizing a document or mentioning the salient points of a contract is helpful, but repeating sentences and paragraphs may lead the reader to skip over those parts later.• Don’t close on a weak note. Words like “hope,” “wish,” “if,”“should,” “could,” and “might” signal a lack of confidence (“If you wish, I could come for an interview at your convenience”; “Call me if you’re interested”).• Don’t try to attract attention with “cute” stationery, humor, multiple question marks or exclamation marks, smiley faces, or other gimmicks. You want to personalize your letter and make it stand out, but there’s a fine line between an enthusiastic, confident letter and one that makes the reader wince. If you’re in any doubt as to which your letter is, ask someone to evaluate it for you.Tips on Writing• Cover letters aren’t needed for routine orders, payments, shipments, recommendations, references, or when the recipient has requested or is expecting your enclosure. Include a cover letter when the materials are not expected, do not speak clearly for themselves, or benefit from an accompanying persuasive message.124 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Double-check names, titles, and addresses for accuracy; this is crucial when applying for a position or sending a manuscript to an editor.• Be brief. Shakespeare’s advice was to use “few words, but to effect.” Except when the cover letter is a sales letter accompanying samples, product literature, or catalogs, it is only a side dish, not the main course. A good cover letter is usually not more than one page long (five or six paragraphs) and it will make the reader want to set it aside quickly in order to get to the enclosure.• Cover letters are exquisitely clean and attractive, with generous margins and no spelling, grammar, or usage errors. “The old aphorisms are basically sound. First impressions are lasting.” (Jessie Fauset)• InCover Letters That Will Get You the Job You Want(Better Way Books, 1993) Stanley Wynnett says, “The last two words of every cover letter I have ever written arethank you.” Some authorities think that it is presumptuous to say thank you in advance, that it is trite, and that it signals the end of an exchange rather than an intermediate step. However, few people object to being thanked, so use your own judgment.• For more assistance with cover letters, see the excellentCover Letters That Knock ‘Em Deadby Martin Yate, 3rd ed. (Adams Media Corporation, 1998) andCover Lettersby Taunee Besson, 2nd ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 1996). For cover letters that accompany résumés, seeThe Perfect Cover Letterby Richard H. Beatty, 2nd ed. (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1997) and for cover letters that accompany manuscript submissions, seeHow to Write Attention-Grabbing Query & Cover Lettersby John Wood (Writer’s Digest Books, 1996).Special Situations• A well-written cover letter for your résumé is a powerful selling instrument. “Very seldom will you write a letter more important to you than that accompanying a résumé.” (Margaret McCarthy) Open by mentioning the person who referred you, the ad you’re responding to, or something complimentary about the company you’re applying to (and the more specific you are about what you like about the company the more effective it is). Identify the position or kind of work you’re applying for. Emphasize how your qualifications match those the company is seeking (but don’t repeat phrases or dates or specific material from the résumé). Don’t focus on what you want, but generate interest in you by telling how you can contribute to the company.Don’t write more than a page; you may want to include everything, but a long cover letter is offputting to a busy person and your résumé may not get read at all. Don’t send a one-size-fits-all cover letter.Tailor each letter to a specific company; recipients often look to see ifHOW TO SAY IT® / 125there is anything related to their company; few are impressed by mass-produced letters. Close by requesting an interview, which is the purpose of your cover letter and résumé: “I will call you next week to arrange an interview appointment after you have had a chance to review my résumé”; “I look forward to meeting with you to discuss the match between your requirements and my qualifications.” See APPLICATIONS for additional ideas for writing the cover letter.• The cover letter you send to an editor with a manuscript is brief.Its main purpose is to introduce your submission (type of book or article, title, word count) and yourself (past publishing credits or credentials for writing the material). A good cover letter includes a tightly written paragraph that reads like catalog copy. Your best writing skills are used to describe or give the flavor of your book or article. Always (that’s “always”) include a SASE and close with a courtesy.• The cover letter that accompanies a report identifies the report by title; mentions why it was prepared, who authorized it, and who wrote it; provides a summary (based on the report’s introduction, abstract, or summary). If the report is formal, the transmittal letter is placed after the title page and before the table of contents.• A note that accompanies a gift has a purpose similar to that of a cover letter. Identify the enclosure (“a little something for your birthday”) and include your greetings and best wishes. To accompany a corporate gift, mention the occasion for the gift, if there is one (service anniversary, completion of a major project). Be specific about the person’s work, talent, anniversary, or award: “I’m particularly grateful because…” or “You’ve been a delight to work with because…” or“Your work has meant a lot to the company because…” Relate an anecdote, a shared memory, or reflection that bolsters your good wishes.End your note with pleasant wishes for continued success or with some forward-looking remark about your future work association.The same type of note is written when the gift is being sent to the person from the shipper or from an Internet company, except that the writer mentions sending “a little something” or “something I thought you’d like” or “something for your desk” and, when possible, estimates when it will arrive. The impact of a corporate gift is magnified one-hundredfold when it is accompanied by a handwritten note of appreciation. Employees who receive such a note from a busy executive feel valued in a personal, memorable way.• A cover letter accompanying a sample or product literature is more properly considered a sales letter (see SALES).Format• Except for notes accompanying gifts or the most informal transmittals, cover letters are typed on business letterhead or on memo126 / HOW TO SAY IT®paper (for in-house materials or for those outside people and firms with which you have a high-volume and casual correspondence).• When asked to fax or e-mail a résumé, you will also be faxing or e-mailing your cover letter. In the case of a fax, write it as you would a regular letter on letterhead stationery and use the “fine resolution”setting to ensure that it is as attractive and readable as possible when it arrives.• Use form cover letters to accompany requested information. To give them a more personal appearance, use good quality paper, address the person by name (instead of “Dear Friend” or “Dear Subscriber”), and sign each letter individually. For potentially important customers, write a personal cover letter.WORDSannounceenclosedpolicyprovisionsattachedillustrateprojectreportdelivernoticeproposalsummarizedocumentoutlineprospectustermsdraftPHRASESacquaint you withfor further informationas promisedhere are/isat your requestI am sending youbrochure that presents/details/if you need/want additionaldescribes/outlines/explainsinformationcall with questionsI’m also enclosingcomplimentary copyin response to your advertisementdirect your attention toplease note thatenclosed is/arerough draftSENTENCESAfter you have reviewed the enclosed proposal, please call me (or Bess Beynon if I’m out of town) to discuss it.As a June graduate of Cleveland College with a BA in business, I am looking for employment and wanted to check first with you because I so enjoyedHOW TO SAY IT® / 127working for The Clement Group as an intern in your marketing department.As you will see from my résumé, I have a great deal of experience in program development, administration, contract development, and budget planning.At your request, I am enclosing three copies of the Empire State Film Festival program.Complete medical records from the office of Dr. Anna Lakington for Mr.Barnabas Holly are enclosed.Enclosed are copies of the recorded deeds and easements for the above-referenced properties.Enclosed is a completed application form—please note my four years’ experience as an installation technician.Enclosed is a copy of the survey on equipment rental in the six-county metro area.Enclosed is a quitclaim deed conveying the new Fort Road from Faulkland County to the City of Sheridan.Enclosed is the requested report on the Heat Treatment Seminar, held July 14–17.Here are the molding samples we’d like you to evaluate.I am enclosing the damaged belt from my twenty-year-old Bannister vacuum in the hopes that you can locate a replacement for it.I am interested in your part-time position for a truck unloader.I am responding to your advertisement in Sunday’s paper for a senior analyst programmer.I am writing to introduce myself and inquire about openings for a Tae Kwon Do instructor.I believe I am well qualified to apply for your opening for a water quality extension agent.I’m sending you a copy of the article on the Minnesota twins study that we discussed last week.In response to your ad for a website producer/editor, I’m enclosing my résumé, which details my considerable experience in this area.I understand you are looking for a form tool grinder.I will telephone your assistant Monday morning to see if you can schedule an interview next week to discuss the position.I would like to bring my commercial interior design skills to work for En-gelred Offices, Inc.Ms. DeGroot suggested I contact you about the development grant writer and board liaison position.128 / HOW TO SAY IT®Please sign both copies of the enclosed letter of agreement and return them to us.Prentice Page suggested I write you about the wallpapering specialist position.Thank you for your patience—enclosed please find the replacement part for your Noyes Intercommunication System.Under separate cover I’m sending you samples of our new line of Natural Solution products for the hair.We are pleased to send you the set of deck plans you requested.Will you please look over the enclosed rough draft of your will and let me know if it needs any changes or corrections?PARAGRAPHSI note that you are seeking a warehouse manager with five years of supervisory or managing experience and five years of experience in shipping, receiving, and inventory control. This almost precisely describes my qualifications.Enclosed is a sample (ref. #4467-AB) of the film that Alwyn Tower and I discussed with you last Thursday. Please keep in mind that the sample was produced under laboratory conditions. If you have any questions about this material or variations of it, please call Alwyn or me.Enclosed is an Agreement and Release between you and Lakely Associates, which gives the terms of the settlement for the redevelopment of your well. When you sign the Agreement and present written proof of the adjudication of the well to Lakely Associates, we will send you a check for the agreed-upon amount.Our check for $15,223.92 is enclosed and constitutes full payment for all items listed on Invoice # 68-331982. Thank you for your help in getting the airconditioners to us so quickly.Today I am shipping approximately one square foot each of 0.090 to 0.100 inch thick sheets of Fe-3% Si (hot-rolled) and IF (niobium-containing interstitial-free; hot-rolled, one sheet, cold-rolled, one sheet). The rolling direction is marked on each sheet.I am currently employed in an engineering environment by a large independent transportation firm, but I am interested in making a career change into the investment/financial services field. I have recently obtained my CFP designation and hope to find a position as a broker trainee. I am enclosing my résumé for your review and consideration for such a position.Enclosed is the complete report on the foreign language survey conducted last fall. Vice-presidents and personnel directors of one hundred of the nation’s largest corporations were asked which foreign languageHOW TO SAY IT® / 129would be most important for a successful business career during the next twenty years. The results may surprise you!Thank you for your interest in Griffiths Collar and Shirt Company.I’m enclosing a packet of materials that will describe our range of products and services. I will call you next week to see if you have any questions and to discuss how we might be of help to you. You are, of course, always welcome to visit our offices and factory here in Lycurgus.You’ve been buying Ponderevo’s Cough Lintus and our line of Mogg’s soap for years. Now we proudly announce a new product that is sure to become a household word: Tono-Bungay! Enclosed are several samples. Try Tono-Bungay yourself and share some with friends. Our Order Line is available to you 24 hours a day, and orders are shipped within 48 hours.The attached set of project plans covers work through the end of 2004.The plans have been generated in consultation with each of the key people involved. We expect to review progress the first of each month and to adjust the work accordingly. You will note that we are dependent on the work of others in the office and that they are in turn dependent on us. Please review the scheduled work and give me your comments.SAMPLE LETTERSDear G.E. Challenger,I was intrigued with the ad in Sunday’s paper seeking someone experienced with high pressure liquid chromatography—first, because there aren’t that many openings in this field and, second, because my experience and background match almost precisely what you appear to need.I was further intrigued when I called the number given in the ad and discovered that this is your company. I have never forgotten several of your research papers that were required reading when I was in college.After you have a chance to read my résumé, I hope you will agree that an interview might be interesting for us both.Dear Kurt,Enclosed is a copy of the letter of recommendation I wrote for you.I’ve sent the original on to the academic dean in the envelope you provided. I thought you might like a copy for your files.I am so pleased you asked me to do this. I just hope I was of some small help. Let me know as soon as you hear the good news!With best wishes,Dear Dr. Cheesewright,Your office manager, Ms. Sherriff, mentioned to me that you might130 / HOW TO SAY IT®soon have an opening for a dental hygienist. She suggested I send you my résumé.You may not remember, but I was a patient of yours when I was growing up here, and even as a youngster I thought it would be “fun”to work in your office! I’ve been living in Chicago for the past ten years, but am planning to move back here because of my father’s health.After you’ve had a chance to look at my résumé, you can reach me at 555-1234 to schedule an interview.Dear Maria,I received the film sample (#18-1 A) from Julian Silvercross and am impressed. We are excited about the performance improvement that we think this technology may offer us. As Nancy Sibley explained to you on the phone, we are interested in using it for our silicon detector assembly, which is an integral part of sensors used for various industrial purposes.I’m enclosing three of these detector assemblies for your review. Feel free to dissect them to locate the detector assemblies.We ask that you respect the confidentiality of our product and interest in your film. Please give me a call after you have had a chance to look at the sensors.Yours truly,Dear Mr. Oakley:Enclosed is your copy of the contract between Sullivan Press and Eaglesham Publications. Several of the clauses are being revised, and I will see that you receive the amended version as soon as it is ready.If you have any questions about your obligations under the contract, please check with our attorney, Mary Jane Reed, in the Legal Services Department.Sincerely yours,See also: APPLICATIONS, QUERIES, RESUMES, SALES.