17Letters About CreditThe world is a puzzling place today. All these banks sending us credit cards….Imagine a bank sending credit cards to two ladies over a hundred years old!What are those folks thinking?—SARAH AND A. ELIZABETH DELANYMuch of the paperwork involved in obtaining and granting credit has been standardized and codified into forms reflecting federal, state, or institutional rules and guidelines. However, nonroutine matters require carefully written letters.Letters About Credit Include• approving loans• canceling an account• collecting past-due accounts (see COLLECTION)• congratulations: fine record/payment (see also SALES)• credit bureaus: letters to and from• delinquent account• denying/refusing credit or loan applications (see REFUSALS)• errors in credit history• explaining credit/loan refusals/conditions• extending payment deadlines• family members and friends: lending/borrowing• inviting new accounts/reviving inactive accounts• obtaining one’s own credit history• requesting credit/bankcard/loanHow to Say It• When asking a credit bureau for a copy of your credit report: give name, address, social security number, and telephone number. Use letterhead stationery or enclose a business card to substantiate that you are the subject of the check. When requesting a credit report on another person: supply the person’s name, address, and social secur-131132 / HOW TO SAY IT®ity number; give a reason for asking (you are renting property to the person, selling them a car, co-signing a contract for deed with them).• When writing an individual or a business to ask for a credit reference, give the name and address of the person under consideration, request any pertinent credit information, explain briefly why you want it (“we are discussing a partnership”), state that you will treat the information confidentially, express your appreciation for the information, and enclose a self-addressed stamped envelope for their reply.In some cases, mention how you were referred to them (for example, by the person under consideration). Ask specific questions: How long have you known the person? In what capacity? What kinds of credit have you extended? What is the current balance? The person’s payment pattern? How long have they been employed there? What is their income?• When requesting correction of an inaccurate credit record, identify yourself by full name and address, state the incorrect portions of the record, and explain why they are incorrect. Include copies of documents (statements, loan papers, tax returns, paycheck stubs) substantiating your position. Ask that a corrected copy of the report be sent to you. Thank the person; they most likely were not responsible for the errors and can, in fact, be helpful to you.• When denying credit or a loan: thank the person for their interest; express regret that you are unable to extend credit; assure them that you considered their request thoroughly; suggest an alternate course of action (layaway, paying cash, smaller loan) that will allow a continued relationship; encourage them to re-apply later. If questioned further, list your credit criteria, mentioning the problems presented by the person’s credit background, and telling what sources you used to determine creditworthiness. For smaller, more routine credit requests, use forms stating simply, “Your request for a loan has been denied,” followed by a check-off list of possible reasons: length of employment, lack of information, excessive credit obligations, newcomer to the area with no credit record, poor payment record, gar-nishment. Leave a blank to fill in the name of the credit bureau where you obtained your information.• When approving a loan application or granting credit, state that you’ve approved the request, indicate the amount approved and the effective date, and explain credit or loan payoff procedures. Enclose forms needing signatures along with instructions on how to complete them. Welcome new customers to your lending institution or business, express appreciation for their business, and suggest they bring all their credit needs to you.HOW TO SAY IT® / 133What Not to Say• Don’t write anything that cannot be documented. Phrases like “misses payments” or “habitually late with payments” must be substantiated by records of such payment patterns.Tips on Writing• Credit matters are confidential. Take every precaution to safeguard the credit information you give or receive.• Accuracy is essential when providing information on someone’s credit history. Double-check your facts as well as spellings of names and account numbers.• Be tactful. Even people with poor credit histories want to hear good of themselves and often feel they are doing a decent job given their circumstances. In her 1923 book, Mary Owens Crowther writes,“Tactless credit handling is the most effective way known to dissipate good-will.”Special Situations• Loans between family members or friends often come with hidden financial and personal costs. When requesting a loan, be businesslike and factual: tell how much you need and why; suggest a repayment plan and the amount of interest you will pay. Always offer the other person a face-saving “out” (“You may have financial problems of your own, for all I know,” “This may not be a good time for you,” or “You may disapprove, on principle, of loans between friends”). Reassure them that there is no reason to feel guilty or uncomfortable about turning you down. Do not beg or play on their sympathies; pressuring a person who is not willing to lend you money won’t get you the money—and it will lose you a friend. When refusing a request for a personal loan, be brief: “I wish I could help you, but it’s not possible just now.” Don’t overexplain or apologize or hedge. If you like, close by asking if there is some other way you could help. When granting a request for a loan from a friend or family member, put it in writing: state the loan amount, the terms and dates of repayment, the interest, and any other information. Send two copies of your letter and ask that the person sign and date one and return it to you. To remind a friend or family member of an overdue loan, be gentle at first: “I know how busy you are…”; “I wonder if you forgot about…”; “Am I mistaken, or did we agree that you’d repay the loan September 1?” If you write a second time, include a photocopy of your original agreement letter and word your expectation of getting your money back more strongly.134 / HOW TO SAY IT®• If you can’t make a loan or installment credit payment on time, write the company at once. Apologize for being overdue, tell them you intend to pay as soon as possible, and enclose whatever portion of the balance you can. If you have a good reason for being overdue (illness, layoff), mention it. Otherwise, don’t go into lengthy excuses; your creditor is more interested in knowing that you are taking responsibility for the account.Format• There are virtually no handwritten letters dealing with credit matters. Routine correspondence may be handled with form letters.Others will be typed on business letterhead.WORDSapplicationdefaultlessorreimburseapprovalfinancelienrepayarrangementfundsloanrequirementsbalanceguaranteemortgageverifycollateralinstallmentnonpaymentcreditworthyIOUreceiptdebtlenderregretfullyPHRASESafter careful considerationlate paymentsalthough you have only occasionalmust delay paymentpayment problemsone of our credit requirements isapply for credit privilegespattern of late paymentsas much as we would like to extendpay in advance/in fullcredit to youpleased to be able to accommodatecannot justify approvalyoucash basis onlypoor payment historyconsistently on-time credit paymentspreferred customercredit application/history/record/regret that we are unable tostanding/rating/limitresponsible use of creditHOW TO SAY IT® / 135current/up-to-date financialreview of our filesstatementsteady credit paymentsdue to a rise in the number ofsubject only to normal credituncoil ectable past-due accountsrequirementsdue to cash flow difficultiesunable to accommodate you at thisexcellent credit ratingtimefinancial difficulties/needs/servicesunpaid balancein checking your credit backgroundwe are happy/pleased to approveit is our policywill you please run a credit checkonI understand and appreciate yourposition, butSENTENCESBecause our inquiries disclosed a number of past-due and unpaid accounts, we are unable to extend the line of credit you requested.Could you could see your way clear to lending me $200 for approximately three weeks, until I receive my income tax refund (enclosed is a copy of my return, showing the amount I will be receiving)?Cressida Mary MacPhail, 1968 Taylor Avenue, Bretton, IN 47834, has applied to the Maxwell Credit Union for a loan, and gave us your name as a reference.Eileen Schwartz has had an excellent credit history with this company, and we recommend her highly as a credit customer.I appreciate your courtesy in allowing me to pay off the balance of my account in small installments.I’m writing to notify you of an error in our credit history and to request an immediate correction.I would appreciate your raising my credit limit from $10,000 to $20,000.Please close my Fortis-Pryde account, effective immediately.Please keep us in mind for your other credit needs.The credit bureau cites repeated credit delinquencies.We are pleased to report that our credit dealings with Angela Crossby have been excellent.We are puzzled that our application for a home equity line of credit has been refused—please send us a copy of our credit report, if that was the problem, or your explanation for this refusal.136 / HOW TO SAY IT®We are unable to furnish you with any current credit information on Emerson-Toller—they have not been a credit customer of ours for over ten years.We expect to be making large purchases of office furniture from your firm as well as routine purchases of office supplies and would like to open a credit account with you.We have run into some difficulties checking the references you supplied.We note a persistent pattern of nonpayment in your credit history.We suggest you reapply for the loan once you have resolved some of these problems.We will appreciate any credit information you can give us about Walter Tillotson.PARAGRAPHSEnclosed please find a check for $457.32, which will bring my account up to date. I am sorry that I let the account become past due. I expect to keep it current in the future.I would like to see the credit record you currently have on me. I am applying for a second mortgage on my home next month, and would not want to be unpleasantly surprised by anything that may be on file.Thank you.I am pleased to report that we were able to approve your loan request for the amount of $5,000. A check is enclosed, along with a payment booklet and a packet of payment envelopes. Please read your repayment schedule carefully.We are sorry to report that your loan application has not been approved. Our decision was based primarily on information received from the Carnaby Reporting Services credit bureau. You may want to look at their record on you to verify that it is correct. If it is, we suggest working with a financial counselor, something that has been helpful to several of our customers. We will be happy to review your loan application at a later date if your circumstances change.In order to set up a credit account for you with Copper Beeches, we need the following information: company name and tax identification number; a copy of your annual report; the names of banks with which you currently have accounts and those account numbers; names and phone numbers of at least three companies from whom you have purchased materials in the past six months. We appreciate your business and look forward to serving you.Because of an electrical fire at our main plant three months ago, we have been experiencing some temporary financial difficulties and have fallen behind on our payments to you. We expect to rectify the situationHOW TO SAY IT® / 137by the end of the year. In the meantime, please accept the enclosed check on account. We thank you for your understanding.We must report that our business experiences with the Baroness de la Cruchecassée have been less than satisfactory. Over a period of eighteen months we have failed to collect anything on a fairly large outstanding balance. We trust you will keep this information confidential.SAMPLE LETTERSTO: Dudley Credit DataFROM: Eustace Landor, Landor First Banks DATE: September 3, 2003RE: Edith MillbankWill you please run a credit check for us on:Edith Millbank1844 ConingsbyOswald, OH 45042Social Security # 000-00-0000Ms. Millbank is taking out a loan application with us, and we wish to verify the information she has given us with regard to her credit history.Thank you.Dear Ms. Panzoust,Thank you for your letter of March 16 requesting our opinion of the creditworthiness of Valmouth Fiber Arts.We have had only the most limited business transactions with them and, since they have always been on a cash basis with us, we have no idea of their financial standing. I would not feel comfortable expressing an opinion on so little information.I’m sorry I couldn’t have been more helpful.Re: Loan #211925Dear Ms. Parry-Lewis,We have reviewed your request for a renewal of your home equity loan, as required by Raine National Bank every five years. In addition to a pattern of late payments and frequent disagreements about interest payments, we find that your current financial obligations seem excessive for your stated income. As a result, we are unable to grant you a renewal.We would be happy to serve your banking needs in the future. If you meet our criteria for a home equity loan renewal in six months, please re-apply and we will waive the new-loan fees.Sincerely,138 / HOW TO SAY IT®Dear Michael Dunne,We noticed that you have not used your Pearson Charge Card in some time now. If you do not use it before it expires in March of 2004, we will be unable to issue you a new card for the following year.We would be sorry to lose you as a good charge customer, but we think that you would lose too—lose out on such benefits as the $250,000flight insurance that is yours every time you charge an airline ticket on your card…the twice-yearly newsletter that saves you money by offering discounts on motels, car rentals, and vacation packages…the low annual rate…the variable interest rate…and the flexibility of a card that can be used at over 15,000 places of businesses!We hope that you will rediscover the many uses and benefits of the versatile Pearson Charge Card!Sincerely yours,See also: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ADJUSTMENTS, ANNOUNCEMENTS, APOLOGIES, COLLECTION, COMPLAINTS, ORDERS, REFUSALS, REQUESTS, RESPONSES, THANK YOU.