18Letters of DisagreementAnyone who thinks there aren’t two sides to every argument is probably in one.—THE COCKLE BURThere are people who thrive on conflict, and there are those who spend enormous energy avoiding it. If they live in the real world, both types will sooner or later have to write a letter about a disagreement. Disagreement is neither good nor bad, but the way you handle it affects subsequent events, feelings, and relationships.Letters of Disagreement May Concern• contracts• decisions• oral agreements• payments• personnel problems• policies/programs/procedures/regulations• property linesHow to Say It• Refer to the previous correspondence or to the event responsible for the present letter.• Outline the two opposing views or actions.• Give clear (perhaps numbered) reasons for your stand, using statistics, quotations from an employee handbook, supportive anecdotal material, or names of witnesses or others who agree with you (with their permission).• If appropriate, suggest an intermediate stage of negotiation: a reply to specific questions in your letter; further research; a meeting between the two of you or with third parties present; visits to a lawyer, accountant, or other appropriate expert.• If the disagreement has reached the stage where you can effectively do this, state clearly the outcome you desire.139140 / HOW TO SAY IT®• End with your best wishes for a solution acceptable to both of you and a reference to good future relations.What Not to Say• Don’t put the person on the defensive. Use more “I” than “you”phrases (“you” statements tend to sound accusatory). Make sure your letter doesn’t make the person feel bad, shamed, inept, or weak; people who have been made to feel small are not likely to give you what you want.• Avoid language that escalates the situation (“ridiculous,” “egregious,”“brainless”). This is counterproductive as well as unconvincing.“Neither irony nor sarcasm is argument.” (Rufus Choate) It also betrays vulnerability. “Strong and bitter words indicate a weak cause.”(Victor Hugo)• Avoid emotional statements. Concentrate on facts instead of feelings.For example, saying, “I don’t feel this is fair” does not carry as much weight as saying, “I believe it is unfair that only one out of seven secretaries is consistently asked to work overtime—and without overtime pay.”Tips on Writing• The tone of your letter can make all the difference between being heard and not being heard. Strive for a letter that is factual, dispassionate, considerate, and even-handed.• Be clear about your goal. Before writing, think about the end of this sentence: “I want them to…” Do you want a rebate, an exchange, repairs? Do you want an apology, a corrected statement, a credit? Do you want to convince the person that their facts, statistics, opinions are wrong? Do you want something redone?• Help the other person save face. Set up the situation so that the person can do what you want in a way that makes them feel generous, gracious, powerful, and willing.• Although active voice is usually preferred to the passive voice, consider using the more tactful passive voice when involved in a disagreement. Instead of saying, “You did this,” say, “This was done.”• Examine your position for possible areas of negotiation. Can you trade one point for another? Can you accept anything less than what you originally wanted?• When writing to disapprove the passage of legislation, note whether the bill is state or federal and then write the appropriate lawmakers. Federal bills have numbers prefixed by HR (House Resolution) or SR (Senate Resolution). State bills are usually denoted HF(House File) and SF (Senate File).HOW TO SAY IT® / 141Special Situations• You will handle most disagreements yourself or with the help of family or co-workers. However, in situations like the following you may want to consult with a lawyer: in marital separations where letters contain admissions, demands, or threats; where you need to reduce informal, oral agreements to written agreements; when family disagreements about an estate become heated; when you are being accused of something; when the disagreement escalates to threats of lawsuits.• Sometimes groups use letterwriting campaigns on controversial issues. A sample letter is distributed for proponents to copy over their own signature. When representatives are interested in the number of people on each side of an issue, such letterwriting campaigns have value. Most often, however, form letters do not get much attention.One well-written original letter will carry more weight with a lawmaker than a hundred form letters. Know when a group effort is effective and when it is not. “If you were the Establishment, which would you rather see coming in the door: one lion or five hundred mice?”(Florynce B. Kennedy)• When you write to lawmakers to inform them of your opinion on an issue, you often don’t need to receive a three-page reply outlining their position—a position with which you’re already familiar from the newspapers. In this case, end your letter with, “Please do not respond to this letter. I know your views; I wanted you to know mine.”Format• Letters dealing with business disagreements are typed on letterhead stationery.• When writing about personal disagreements, your letter will appear friendlier and a little more open to negotiation if you handwrite it. If you wish to appear firm and not open to negotiation, typing is best.WORDSargumentbreakconflictcontentioncontroversydead-enddeadlockdifferdilemmadisapprovedispleaseddisputedissatisfactiondisturbingestrangementfactionfeudfrictionimpasseincompatibleimpasseincompatibleinfuiatedirritating142 / HOW TO SAY IT®misunderstand-objectoffenseprotestingquarrelreconcileregrettableriftstalematestandstillunfortunateunhappyPHRASESagree to differ/disagreeas I understand itat cross purposesbe at odds withbelieve you should know thatbone of contetnionbury the hatchetcome to termscomplicated situationconduct an inquirydifference of opiniondirect your attention todisputed pointdo a disservice toifail to agreeI am convinced thatI assume/presume/think/have toI have the impressin thatdoubt thatin my estimation/judgment/opin-in the best interests ofion/viewI take it thatit seems to mematter/point in dispute/at issue/my information isunder discussin/in questionpart company withpoint of viewquestion at issueregister my opinionstrongly opposetake into considerationthink differentlyto my way of thinkingto the best of my knowledgewonder if you are aware thatSENTENCESAre we ready to put this to a vote?Do you think it would help to call in an arbitrator?Enclosed please find several abstracts that may be helpful.I agree with the necessity of fundraising for the purchase and maintenance of band instruments, but I disagree with the fundraising program adopted for next year.HOW TO SAY IT® / 143I am convinced that the passage of this bill would do more harm than good/is not in the best interests of the state/would be a grave error.I disagree with the store policy of filling prescriptions with generic drugs without notifying the customer.I found the language and tone of your last letter completely unacceptable; please put us in touch with someone else in your organization who can handle this matter.If you would like some background reading on this issue, I would be happy to furnish you with some.I received your letter this morning and am sorry to hear that you cannot accept our terms.Several of the points you mention are negotiable; some are not.We are submitting this matter to an independent referee.We still have one major area of disagreement.What would make the situation more agreeable to you?PARAGRAPHSI realize that there is technically no more to be said about the Dillon-Reed merger, but I would like to state for the record that I strongly oppose the move. I refer you to the enclosed independent report that we commissioned from Elkus, Inc. This is the classic situation where one owns a dog but persists in barking oneself. The Elkus people, acknowledged experts in the field, advised us against the merger. Do we have strong enough grounds for rejecting their conclusions? I think not.I know we’ve talked about this until we’re both blue in the face, but I feel strongly that Great-Aunt Elsie is not yet ready for a nursing home.It would make her unhappy and shorten her life to be placed in one prematurely. What changes would you need to see before you could feel comfortable about her remaining in her apartment?My lawyer requested the addition of the following clause to the contract: “Clause S. This agreement will expire ten years from the date of execution.” The clause does not appear in the final contract. I know this issue was in dispute at one time, but I understood that you had finally agreed to it. I am returning the unsigned contracts to you for correction.We seem to be at an impasse on determining the boundary line between our properties. Would you be interested in sharing the costs of hiring a surveyor?SAMPLE LETTERSDear Ms. Burling-Ward:144 / HOW TO SAY IT®I enjoy working for Stegner Publishing, and you in particular have been most helpful in introducing me to people and showing me around.When I was interviewed for the job, Mr. Oliver consistently used the term “production editor,” and the job duties he listed were those generally associated with the position of production editor.During my three weeks on the job, I have done nothing but copyedit-ing. After speaking to you yesterday and discovering that this was not just a training stage but my permanent position, I suspect there has been a misunderstanding.I would like to meet with you and Mr. Oliver sometime soon to clarify this situation.Sincerely,Dear Nandie and Victor,Our jazz trio has been so compatible and has had such a good time these last three years that I’m uncomfortable with our present disagreement. I think we’re used to getting along and thus don’t know how to handle it when we don’t agree.Here’s my suggestion. Next Thursday night, instead of rehearsing, let’s meet at Saduko’s Restaurant for dinner. Each of us will bring three 3 x 5 cards with our reasons for changing the trio’s name.After a good meal and some non-work conversation, we will exchange cards so that each of us is holding the three viewpoints. I hope we can then come to a good decision.What do you think?AngeloDear Mr. and Mrs. Archibald Craven,Thank you for your letter of November 30, disputing the payment of interest charges on your “12-month interest-free” purchase of furniture from us.When you purchased your sofa, chair, and ottoman last November 18, we offered to carry the full amount of the purchase, $1,574.97, interest-free for one year—and you accepted our offer. The terms of the offer were explained at that time.Each month thereafter you received a statement from us, noting the amount of the original purchase, the accruing finance charges, and stating clearly, “If you pay the payoff amount by the expiration date listed below, you will be credited for the amount of interest accumulated on that purchase.”You did not pay the payoff amount by the expiration date of our agreement, November 19 of this year; thus you now owe the payoff amount plus the accrued interest of $272.61.Please note that interest will continue to accrue until all charges are paid.HOW TO SAY IT® / 145For further questions, call Mary Lennox in the Accounts Due Department at 555-1234.See also: COMPLAINTS, NEIGHBORS, REFUSALS, SENSITIVE.