19Letters to the EditorIt were not best that we should all think alike;it is difference of opinion that makes horse-races.—MARK TWAINLetters to the editor constitute some of people’s favorite reading. Knowing this, almost every newspaper and periodical prints a limited number of letters in each issue. A daily newspaper publishes as many as 30 to 40 percent of the letters it receives; a national weekly newsmagazine publishes only 2to 5 percent of its incoming letters. Fortunately, there are ways of increasing the chances of your letter being chosen for publication.Write a Letter to the Editor When• you agree or disagree with a story, article, news item, editorial stance, or other letterwriter• you have an opinion about a topic of current national or local interest• you want to correct published information• you want to reach a large number of people with information that you think would interest themHow to Say It• In the first sentence, refer to the issue that prompted your letter (“the Nov. 1 editorial opposing a new hockey arena”) so that readers know immediately what you’re talking about.• State your position (“I agree with,” “I oppose,” “I question”).• Briefly support, defend, or explain your position. Most publications have word limits for these letters; if you exceed them, editors may trim your letter in ways you don’t like. Aim for around 100 to 300words.• Include facts (statistics, studies, articles, items of record, quotes) rather than feelings and impressions. If you have specific knowledge or a professional connection with an issue, mention it; this often makes publication likelier and your opinion more useful.146HOW TO SAY IT® / 147• Indicate what action, if any, you want readers to take (form neighborhood block watches, call legislators, boycott a product, sign a petition, stop littering).• Close with a startling, memorable, or powerful sentence, if possible—something that makes the reader want to go back and read your letter again.• Give your first and last name, or at least two initials and a last name, address, and daytime phone number. Sign your name. Almost all publications insist on this. When letters to the editor are signed by a number of people, usually only one or two of the names are published (followed by a note “and 16 others”); most publications prefer to use that space for opinions, not lists of names.What Not to Say• Don’t begin your letter with, “You won’t dare print this letter.” Editors generally delete such sentences because, in fact, they dare to print a wide range of opinion, including letters critical of themselves.• Avoid whining (“It’s not fair,” “It always happens to me”). It does not make interesting reading.• Don’t expect newspapers or magazines to print letters that are thinly disguised advertisements for your business or your group. If you want people to know about a nonprofit, community-wide event, editors are generally willing to include it in an events column.• Avoid half-truths or inaccuracies. Letters are subject to editing for length, libel, good taste, newspaper style, and accuracy. Editors will check the facts in your letters.• Don’t write anything that can be proved malicious (even if it’s true) and don’t write anything that can’t be proved (even if there’s no intent to harm); publishers won’t print anything libelous.• Don’t use threats, bullying language, pejorative adjectives (“stupid,”“ridiculous,” “redneck,” “bleeding heart liberal”), or stereotypes (“what can you expect from a lawyer,” “labor unions have always looked out for themselves first,” “another anti-male feminist”). Certain readers will agree with your sentiments. Most, however, will see, quite properly, that such language indicates a weak argument.Margaret Thatcher once said, “I always cheer up immensely if an attack is particularly wounding because I think, well, if they attack one personally, it means they have not a single political argument left.”• Don’t end your letter with “Think about it!” One editor says this line shows up routinely in letters and is just as routinely deleted. If your letter appears on the opinion-editorial (op-ed) page, the implication is that you want people to think about it.148 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Don’t submit poetry, lost-and-found announcements, or personal messages (“I’m looking for descendants of Jenny Treibel”).Tips on Writing• Check the area near the letters-to-the-editor column for guidelines; most publications have requirements.• Address your letter “To the Editor,” rather than to the person responsible for the article, cartoon, or letter you’re writing about.• Although regional publications might accept letters commenting on a previously published letter, most national publications have policies against publishing letters about letters.• Your topic should be timely; editors rarely run letters about issues that are weeks or months old.• Limit yourself to one topic, to one main thought. If you don’t stick to the point, your letter will probably be edited so that it does.• Your topic should be important to more than one person (you).Readers may not care how awful your neighbors are, unless you can tie their behavior to a larger issue (people who don’t shovel their walks).• To get a letter accepted in a competitive market, aim for pithiness, humor, unusual information, or a twist on conventional thinking.Editors like letters of interest to other readers, opinionated letters on a controversy, letters reflecting a unique point of view on a broad topic, and letters that are clear, entertaining, and thought-provoking.• When you feel strongly about an issue, get others to write too so that the letters to the editor column reflects that many people feel the way you do.• Have others read your letter; oftentimes you are too close to the problem to see how your letter may affect others.• Most papers won’t print letters from the same individual more frequently than every month or two, so if you’ve just had a letter published there’s no point in writing again soon.• Some publications want letters original to them, not copies of letters sent to other publications. Check your publication’s editorial policy.Special Situations• Anonymous letters aren’t often printed as most publishers believe their readers have a right to know whose views are being expressed.However, some circumstances (prospect of physical harm to the writer or loss of a job) justify anonymous letters. Editors will print such letters over a “Name Withheld.” Call first to be sure this is possible. WhenHOW TO SAY IT® / 149you write, specify that the letter is to be published only if your name does not appear.• Letters-to-the-editor columns become especially popular just before elections. Some publications print letters that support one candidate or criticize another; others ban election-related letters during a period immediately preceding an election or on Election Day in order to avoid being used to launch last-minute offensives. Blatant politicking usually never makes it to the printed page; editors have learned to spot letters that are thinly disguised publicity efforts or those that are part of an effort to create a bandwagon effect.• When asking for a correction or retraction of an inaccuracy, begin by identifying the erroneous article by date, section, page, and column.Be polite, factual, firm. Offer to supply correct data, proofs of your assertion, and phone numbers to call for verification.• Write letters to the editor commending civic groups or individuals who have contributed to the common good in ways that may not be known to everyone. Letters like these not only add welcome relief to the usual fare of the letters column, but they build positive community feelings and often engender more of the same productive activities.Note, however, that “nice” letters don’t often get published; this kind of letter needs an extra dash of humor, wit, or color.Format• Editors prefer typewritten letters. If you handwrite a letter, it must be legible.• Most publications accept e-mailed or faxed letters.WORDSadviceaspectassumeattitudebiascommentaryconcludeconjectureconsensusconsidercontradictcontroversydisagreedisapprovedissatisfieddisturbingdoctrinairedogmaticembarrassingexamineexpressimpressioninferinflammatoryinsultingjudgmentalmisunderstand-notioningoffensiveomissionone-sidedpartisanperspectivepersuadepositionpostureprejudicedpremiseprovocativeslant150 / HOW TO SAY IT®standsupposesurmiseunfortunateviewPHRASESafter reading your Sept. 29 article ona May 3New York Post Dispatcharticle spoke ofan affront to those of us whocartoonist Humphry Clinker shouldbe aware thatdid a slow burn when I readdifference of opinionfail to agreehow can anyone state, as did LaetitiaSnap (June 3), thatI agree wholeheartedly withI am hortified by the Ang. 11 reportI am one of the many "misguided"people who was outraged byI am puzzled by the reference to theI am writing on behalf oflong-term effects ofI disagree with the Reverend Sep-I found the short story in your Sep-timus Crisparkle’s premise Feb. 7)tember issue to beI must take issue withinfuriating to see thatin response to a July 3 letterwriterI really enjoyedwho saidI strongly objectI take exception to the opinions ex-pressed byit seems to meI   w a s   d i s t u r b e d / i n -censed/pleased/angry/disappointedto read thatletterwriter Muriel McComber’smade me see redsuggestion (Aug. 9) was intriguing,butneglected to mentionone side of the storyon the one hand/on the other handpoint in disputepresented a false pictureread with great/considerable in-terestrecipe for disasterregarding Senator Sam Blundel’snew bill for the hearing-impairedseveral letterwriters have commen-the article on women in trades didted uponmuch toHOW TO SAY IT® / 151your editorial position onyour Sept. 17 editorial onSENTENCESA Dec. 9 writer is incorrect in saying that the Regional Transit Board was abolished several years ago; we are, in fact, alive and well.I am writing to express my appreciation for your excellent coverage of City Council meetings on the local groundwater issue.I commend you for your Aug. 11 editorial on magnet schools.I disagree with Elizabeth Saunders’ Apr. 5 column on city-supported recycling.I look forward to seeing a published retraction of the incorrect information given in this article.In Hennie Feinschreiber’s Dec. 9 column on the living will, she uses statistics that have long since been discredited.In his December 1 Counterpoint, “Tax Breaks for the Rich,” Gerald Tetley suggests that out of fear of giving the rich a break, we are actually cutting off our noses to spite our face.I was disappointed that not one of the dozens who wrote to complain about the hike in municipal sewer rates noticed that the rates are actually lower than they were ten years ago.Many thanks for your unpopular but eminently sane editorial stand on gun control (July 2).Please consider the cumulative effect of such legislation on our children.Please do not drop Flora Lewis/Cal Thomas/Ellen Goodman/George Will from your editorial pages.Several important factors were omitted from your Apr. 6 article on wide-area telephone service.The writer of the Mar. 16 letter against triple trailers seemed to have little factual understanding of semi-truck traffic and professional truck drivers.Your Aug. 3 editorial on workers’ compensation overlooked a a crucial factor.Your June 29 editorial on child care failed to mention one of the largest and most effective groups working on this issue.PARAGRAPHSHas anyone noticed that the city has become overrun with dogs in the last several years? Most of these dogs have no collars and run in packs of five to eight dogs. If I had small children, I’d worry when they played152 / HOW TO SAY IT®outdoors. Where have these dogs come from? Whose problem is it? The city council’s? The health department’s? The police department’s?Letter writer Charles Shandon neglected to mention in his long, rather hysterical diatribe against mayoral candidate Hugh Desprez that he is running Mary Shandon’s bid for the mayor’s office. He is also her husband.Your story on the newest technology in today’s emergency rooms featured the views of hospital administrators, medical care-givers, and manufacturers’ representatives. Nowhere was a patient mentioned. Is overlooking the patient also a feature of today’s emergency rooms? (If it is, it’s not new.)To those of you who have been expressing yourself in these pages about the presence of wild geese in the city parks: Hello! A park is supposed to be natural. It is not meant to be as clean as your kitchen floor.It has messy leaves and gravel and bugs and, yes, goose grease. If you can’t handle nature in the raw, there’s always your back yard.Count at least six women (the undersigned) who were outraged at your “news story” on the recently appointed Episcopalian bishop for our area. You devoted several lines early on in the story (thus implying their relative importance) to Ms. Dinah Morris’s clothes, hairstyle, and even the color of her fingernail polish. Do you do this for new male bishops?There was an error in your otherwise excellent article about the Lamprey Brothers Moving and Storage. In addition to brothers Henry, Colin, and Stephen (whom you mentioned), there is also brother Michael, a full partner.A flurry of letter writers urges us to rally against the proposed congressional pay raise. I wonder if they understand the protection that such a raise would give us against special interest groups. Let’s give this one a closer look. It may actually be a sheep in wolf’s clothing.I commend Meg Bishop for the use of “people first” language in her Jan. 2 column. By using expressions such as “people with severe disabilities” rather than “the severely disabled” and “people with quadriplegia”rather than “quadriplegics,” Bishop helps change the way society views people with disabilities.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Mr. Scott,What happened to the ecclesiastical crossword puzzle you used to have every month inThe Abbot?To the Editor:Several months ago, you announced a “bold new look” for the paper.Could we perhaps have the timid old look back?HOW TO SAY IT® / 153Sometimes I find the financial pages behind the sports pages, sometimes in a section of their own, and occasionally with the classified ads.Usually the advice columnists and funnies are run together in their own section, but more often they are separated and positioned variously with the sports pages, the community news, the feature section, or the food pages.I have tried to discern a method to your madness—perhaps on Mondays the sports have their own section, on Tuesdays they appear with the financial papers. No such luck. Somebody down there must just roll dice and say, “Ha! Let them try to find the foreign exchange rates today!”Is there any hope for a more organized future?Dear Mr. Burlap:The excerpt fromPoint Counter Pointin your June issue was excellent.I hope you will continue to offer us selections from lesser-known but high-quality literature.Dear Business Editor:An article in the Aug. 3 morning edition reported sales for our company in the billions. Naturally that would be nice, but it should have read millions. We would appreciate your printing a correction in the next edition of the paper.Enclosed is our most recent annual report.Dear Editor:I read with interest the proposal to add four stories to the downtown public library building at a cost of $5.3 million.I am concerned, however, that no provision has been made for user access. As it now stands, hundreds of thousands of books are all but useless since no one can get to them. There are a handful of metered street parking spaces, but you must be lucky to find one. And then you must not forget to run out every hour and insert four more quarters (the meter readers are particularly active in this area).How many of you have driven around and around and around hoping for a parking place? How many of you have walked five or six blocks carrying a back-breaking load of books? How many of you have gotten $10 tickets because you forgot to feed the meter on time? It is utterly pointless to spend $5.3 million on a facility that no one can use.To the Editor:The front page of your Nov. 3 issue carried a full-color picture of a car accident victim who later died.We, the undersigned, worked with Hilda Derriford—some of us for only two years, some of us for as long as sixteen years. To see our good friend and co-worker displayed in her last moments for an unknowing154 / HOW TO SAY IT®and uncaring public was one of the most painful things we can describe.How her husband and children felt about the picture is another story, but we can’t think they were any less devastated than we were.What is the point of using a photo like that? Can you defend such a practice in any logical, compassionate way?See also: APPRECIATION, COMPLAINTS, DISAGREEMENTS.