20E-mailAdmitting you don ’t have an e-mail address these days isalmost like admitting you still listen to eight-track tapes.—TOM MCNICHOLLess intrusive than the telephone and simpler than writing a letter, e-mail has been adopted by millions.The hallmark of the e-mailed message is its conversational tone. Because questions and answers can be exchanged rapidly, it resembles a dialogue; a regular letter resembles a monologue. Senders dash off emails, knowing that if they make a mistake or omit information, they can send another e-mail in seconds.E-mail has inspired a surge in communicating. People who haven’t written a letter in years use e-mail because of its simplicity, directness, and speed. When contacting someone in another time zone or on another biorhythmic pattern, there is no fear of waking them with a phone call.When working late, you can send information to another person’s electronic mailbox for retrieval first thing in the morning. E-mail is particularly useful when you have a thirty-second message to send someone who usually involves you in a fifteen-minute phone call. It also encourages the sending of quick notes that wouldn’t, in themselves, warrant the effort of a regular letter.E-mail When Your Message Is• brief• informal• sent to a number of people• timely• urgentHow to Say It• Double-check every e-mail address before sending your message.The system is absolutely unforgiving. “Almost correct” doesn’t cut it.155156 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Use a subject line, a word or brief phrase to tell your reader right away what the e-mail is about. Most e-mail servers have their own format, but all will have some sort of space for this purpose. Examples of subject lines:Re: Welcome back!Re: newsletter errorRe: benefits hotlineSubject: the check’s in the mailSubject: fundraising meetingSubject: new corporate library hours• Start with “Hi” or “Hello,” or the person’s name followed by a comma or dash. The “Dear” convention of letters is generally too formal for e-mail.• State your message succinctly. (Some people suggest limiting e-mail messages to one screen.)• If appropriate, tell what action you expect: a telephone call, an e-mail response, attendance at a meeting. When the e-mail is simply for their information, indicate this.• Close with a courtesy, if you wish, or with just your name. Formal closings (“Sincerely,” “Truly yours”) aren’t necessary.• In some cases, include your full name, title, telephone number, and e-mail address. This identifies you quickly and is useful if the e-mail is forwarded to a third party who needs to contact you.What Not to Say• Don’t send high-impact news (a death, new company president, serious illness) by e-mail.• Don’t write anything you don’t want the whole world to know. Email is far from private and it is easily forwarded or misrouted. It was never meant for confidential messages.• Don’t send an urgent message by e-mail unless you know the person is expecting it or you call to say it’s coming; there’s no guarantee it will be read immediately. Some people check their e-mail frequently and in many offices users are notified when e-mail comes in, but other people may not read an e-mail for days.• Don’t write angry e-mails; it’s too easy to fire off our first thoughts and regret them afterwards.• Don’t use all capital letters unless you want the recipient to understand that you are YELLING.Tips on Writing• An e-mail address consists of (1) a name identifying the individual or group (“xyz”); (2) the “at” sign (“@”); (3) the name of the serverHOW TO SAY IT® / 157(for example, “earthling”); (4) a code that identifies the mailer by type (domain):.com (commercial);.net (network);.gov (government);.edu (educational institution);.org (organization—usually nonprofit);.mil (military);.st (state government). Thus: xyz@earthling.org bull; Include one topic per e-mail.• Use everyday, informal language. In a letter you might write “I will”; in an e-mail you write “I’ll.”• Check for accuracy, spelling, and punctuation before transmitting; once it’s gone, it’s gone.• When you send copies of an e-mail (listing the copied recipients’names under “cc”) be aware of the possible effect on your recipient.E-mail has made copying so easy that it is sometimes done unnecessarily and counterproductively. When appropriate and not detrimental to your original recipient, protect other people’s privacy by copying the message to them “bcc” (blind carbon copy).• Certain options don’t work in e-mail (italics, underlining, foreign accents). To indicate italics, put asterisks before and after the word or phrase (“I’m sending you *two* instead of three”).• Don’t waste people’s time with trivial e-mails—jokes or idle thoughts that we’d never consider typing, signing, and sending through the regular mail.• Before forwarding an e-mail, obtain the original sender’s permission and delete the headers and extraneous material.• Do not pass on others’ e-mail addresses without their permission.And never give your password or user ID to anyone you don’t know well.• Abbreviations are popular with some e-mailers. Others never use them and even find them annoying. Examples include: ASAP = as soon as possibleFYI = for your informationBTW = by the wayTIA = thanks in advanceLOL = laughed out loudFAQ = frequently asked questionsOIC = Oh, I seeWTG = way to go• Emoticons are also used by some people, shunned by others. For example,:-) stands for a happy face (look at it sideways) and: ( for an unhappy face;:) for a smile,;-) for a wink,:-D for a laugh, and:’( for crying.• Graphics may not be able to be read by everyone so skip them when unnecessary.• Acknowledge e-mail, especially in work situations. When you can’t respond immediately, send a reply saying the message was received and you will write later. Some systems send an automatic electronic acknowledgment of every e-mail that comes in.158 / HOW TO SAY IT®Special Situations• If you use e-mail at work, familiarize yourself with your company’s policies on e-mail usage, privacy, security, and archiving. The e-mail system is company property and most organizations have guidelines about its use by employees.• The American Management Association recommends documenting your business e-mail transactions so that you can retrace your steps if necessary.• Attachments (long files hooked onto your e-mail “cover letter”) are iffy. If you work for a large company where your computers are effectively protected against viruses, you send and receive attachments worry-free. Individuals using computers in small businesses or at home may decide not to open an attachment because of the possibility of importing a virus. When you must send an attachment, be sure your recipient will open it.• An estimated 15 to 30 percent of the e-mail received in the United States is spam (an unsolicited and generally unwanted e-mail sent to thousands of e-mail addresses, the electronic equivalent of junk mail).Chain letters are both spam and scam; do not indulge. Eliminating spam has so far not been successful. Some software will block certain addresses so that you don’t receive their mail, but the e-mailers get around this by inventing random and unfathomable new e-mail addresses, many of which are not even the correct addresses. In addition, should you respond to their invitation to tell them you want your address removed from their files, they will rejoice because they have found a “live” one and send you more spam than ever. Just delete them. Don’t even sigh, just delete.• Sometimes a friend or acquaintance stuffs your e-box with jokes (that you’ve heard before), chain letters, maudlin anecdotes, canned advice, virus scares, and notices of websites that you absolutely must visit. Letitia Baldrige, former White House social secretary, advises sending the person an e-mail saying, “I really appreciate your thinking of me and keeping me on your routing list, but I’m sorry to say I’m so darned busy, I can’t read my necessary, urgent mail, much less amusing mail. I think it’s time you substituted my name with someone else’s because Father Time won’t let me enjoy your e-mails.”Format• The format will depend upon your server although you will have some choices (length of your lines, whether to include the other person’s message in your e-mail).• Making a hard copy of an e-mail message (that is, printing it) givesHOW TO SAY IT® / 159it the same permanence and nearly the same validity as a letter or memo.WORDSannounceanswerattachmentexplainfollowingforwardinginforminquirenotifyremindreplyrespondPHRASESalert you to the possibilityask your helpdo you knowfor your informationhere arein answer to your questioninformation you wanted/requestedjust a note to let you knowplease let me know ASAPsend me a copy ofspeedy responsewanted to follow upwill you please sendSENTENCESA dear friend of mine would like to ask you a couple of questions—may I forward your e-mail address to her?Did you see the article on hog confinements in today’s Des Moines Register?Do you have a phone number for Joe Mangles?Just a reminder about the conference call with Eusabio International this afternoon at 3 p.m.New surge protectors are now available for anyone who needs one.Subject: Small-diameter sleeve toolsTax forms are available in the lobby from now until April 15, thanks to Courtenay Brundit, who obtained them for us.We’ve been notified that Highway 36 will be closed from July 9–15; you may want to plan alternate routes to work.Will you be home tomorrow around 5:15 so I can drop off the skis?You asked if the company store currently has sandpaper seconds: yes, it does.160 / HOW TO SAY IT®PARAGRAPHSPlease mark your calendars. William Denny, industrial engineer at our new high tech data entry facility in Porter, will explain the latest technology on Thursday, Jan. 21 at 3 p.m. in Building 201B, Room 43. A question-and-answer period will follow.You wanted to know who keeps my Harley in such great shape? I do!Okay, okay, I know what you mean. The greatest Harley repair and service east of the Mississippi is The Caloveglia Shop on South Douglas.Thanks for the new programmable multifunction mouse that you sent over. I’m having a good time with it!In response to your question about the community organizer position, yes, benefits are included. In addition, the deadline for applying has been changed to September 30.Would you please let me know the name of the contractor who did your deck? We’re inspired enough to get going on ours.SAMPLE LETTERSFrom: burb@email.comTo: realty@email.comDate: Fri, 16 Aug 2002 12:41:00Subject: Purchase agreement for 1711 Grismer Yes, draw up a purchase agreement at the asking price and fax me a copy at 651/555-1234. Thanks.From: info@ducksfordinner.comTo: foxes@email.comDate: 20 Nov 2000 14:30:01Subject: Order confirmation # 82654560This is an automated message acknowledging acceptance of your online order. You may check your order status by writing to: info@ducksfordinner.comFrom: clubred@aol.comTo: juliagotrocks@email.comDate: Tue, 18 Jan 2002 16:53:31 ESTSubject: Thank you!Hello Julia—I received your check. Thanks! I put $30 toward dues, and $50 as a contribution to our latest fundraising drive. You’ll be getting a fundraiser letter but it will be fyi only—not to ask you to give again. NettyHOW TO SAY IT® / 161From: sgk@email.comTo: rmk@email.comDate: Wed, 29 Mar 2003 17:02:35 +0400Subject: Help—April 1Hello from Russia! I’m planning my April 1 English class around the idea of practical jokes and I’d appreciate your help. (1) Could you describe this tradition as far as you know it from your own experience? (2) Do you remember a really successful April 1 practical joke? (3) In Russia the joke ends with the cliche “S pervym aprelya!” which means “Congratulations on April 1!” What do they say in the circumstances in your part of the world? Thanks!From: hcalverly@email.comTo: thewhitecompany@email.comDate: Tue, 29 Jul 1997 17:34:08 (EDT)Subject: ATTN: DoyleI received the fax of the essay. It was above and beyond the call of duty, and yes, I still needed it. I owe you one. Best, Hugh From: msadlier@email.comTo: kcairns@email.comDate: 07 Apr 2001 13:01:21Subject: favorKitty, would you be willing to spend fifteen minutes or so speaking with a high-school senior in your area who’s interested in the Fanny Gaslight School of Design? Thanks!See also: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, FAMILY, FOLLOW-UP, MEMOS.