21Letters Dealing with EmploymentIt’s strange how unimportant your job is when you ask for a raise,and how important it is when you want a day off.—HOWIE LASSETERRobert Orben said, “Every morning I get up and look through the Forbes list of the richest people in America. If I’m not there, I go to work.” Most of us go to work.While we’re there, letters between employers and employees contribute to (or undermine) workplace morale, efficiency, and rapport.The employee is affected, directly or indirectly, by letters that range from requesting a raise to asking for clarification of retirement benefits.The employer depends on well-written letters to maintain good employee relations and to resolve personnel problems that interfere with the company’s goals.Employment Letters Deal with• acknowledgments: applications/proposals/suggestions (see also ACKNOWLEDGMENTS)• advice/complaints/reprimands (see ADVICE, COMPLAINTS)• announcements: layoffs/changes/company policies (see ANNOUNCEMENTS, INSTRUCTIONS)• approvals: raise/promotion/projects/requests/changes (see also ACCEPTANCES)• congratulations/commendations (see also CONGRATULATIONS)• getting a job (see APPLICATIONS, COVER LETTERS, REFERENCES, RÉSUMÉS)• interviews (see APPOINTMENTS, FOLLOW-UP, RÉSUMÉS)• invitations: retirement parties/service anniversaries/awards ceremonies/speaking engagements (see also INVITATIONS)• meetings: announcing/canceling/changing/postponing (see also APPOINTMENTS)• networking (see INTRODUCTIONS)• references and recommendations (see REFERENCES)• refusals: raises/promotions/proposals/requests (see REFUSALS) 162HOW TO SAY IT® / 163• requests: raise/promotion/project approval/interview/meeting (see REQUESTS)• resignations• résumés and letters of application (see RÉSUMÉS)• retirement (see also ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ANNOUNCEMENTS, CONGRATULATIONS, INVITATIONS)• terminationsHow to Say It• Date every memo or letter.• When responding to job applicants: (1) If you are unable to make an immediate choice among applicants, acknowledge receipt of their materials or thank them for their interviews. If possible, say when you will notify them of your decision. Thank them for their interest in your company. (2) In the case of a rejection, express appreciation for the applicant’s time and interest and state simply that you are unable to make an offer. If appropriate, briefly explain the decision.Close with positive comments on the person’s application, an invitation to re-apply at a later time (if you mean it), and your confidence of success in the person’s search for a suitable position. (3) When offering someone a position, open with congratulatory and complimentary remarks. Include confirmation of the job description and the name and telephone number of someone who can answer further questions. Repeat a selling point or two about the company to influence the person’s decision to accept the offer. Close with an expression of goodwill about the person’s future with your organization.• When announcing a change in company policies, procedures, or regulations, include: description of the new policy; reference to the old policy, if necessary for clarification; brief reason for the change; expected benefits of the change; deadline for the change implement-ation; instructions or enclosures that further explain the change; name and telephone number of someone to answer questions or help with problems; expression of your enthusiasm about the change.• When you arrange an in-house meeting by memo or e-mail: explain the purpose of the meeting, offer possible dates and times, and express your appreciation for the person’s attention to your request.To change a meeting time, always mention the original date and time and ask for acknowledgment of the new time. To cancel a meeting, repeat the time and date, state that you must cancel (briefly explaining why), and apologize for the inconvenience. If you miss a scheduled meeting, write an immediate, sincere apology.• When writing to request a raise, be brief and factual, supplying as much supporting material as possible (letters of commendation, sales records, copies of patents, research papers, evaluations, list of164 / HOW TO SAY IT®awards). No one ever has a “right” to a raise; do not let this attitude color your letter. Avoid threatening to leave unless you mean it.Don’t compare your salary to others’; it is tactless, usually meaningless, and puts your reader on the defensive. Instead, show how your work has become more valuable to the company or speak of an“adjustment” to reflect additional hours, duties, or productivity.• When writing a reprimand, begin with a positive or complimentary remark. Describe factually the employee behavior and, if necessary, tell why it is unacceptable. If appropriate, tell how this came to your attention. Suggest how the employee can change. State the consequences of continuing the behavior. Close with an expression of confidence that the situation will be handled successfully. A reprimand is brief, respectful, encouraging, and positive (instead of writing,“Do not make personal phone calls while patients are in the waiting room,” say, “Please confine personal phone calls to times when the waiting room is empty.”). Your goal in writing a letter of reprimand is not to get revenge or blow off steam; it is to change employee behavior. Avoid condemning, belittling, haranguing, preaching, scolding, or patronizing the employee.• Notifying employees of layoffs or terminations has become codified—because of labor unions, because of legal ramifications, and because it is most effective for large organizations to follow a uniform manner in dealing with them. When a letter is written, it is brief and might include: a statement about the layoff or termination; an expression of regret at the necessity of taking this measure; the date on which the layoff or termination becomes effective; details on severance pay, profit sharing, retirement benefits, and medical coverage; in the case of a layoff, the possible length of the time, if known; details on company layoff and termination policies, career counseling, letters of recommendation, available public assistance, and other information that helps employees cope with the layoff or termination; the name and telephone number of someone who can answer questions. When the termination is due to the employee’s poor work record or behavior, you will want to follow company and legal guidelines carefully.Tell why they’re being fired and document previous warnings.• When resigning, an oral notice may be all that is necessary. Generally, however, it is useful for both employer and employee to have a written record of the resignation. The common practice is to resign in person and follow up with a letter. Begin by writing something positive about the position, company, or organization you’re leaving.Give the effective date of your resignation. In most cases, give a reason for resigning: poor health; age; family move; work-related health problems; greater opportunities for advancement, higher salary or more desirable location with another company; wish to change careers; recent changes that have affected your position. If you’re leaving because of problems with management, co-workers,HOW TO SAY IT® / 165restrictive company policies, or other negative reasons, be vague:“For personal reasons, I am resigning effective March 1.” Don’t use your letter as a dumping ground for complaints. Take your leave in a polite, dignified manner—even if the truth lies elsewhere. For one thing, you may need a letter of reference. For another, despite confidentiality, angry letters have a way of following you about in your professional community. And you don’t know when you might have dealings with the company in the future. If you’re leaving because of illegal or dishonest practices, take your information (with as much documentation as possible) to outside bureaus or agencies. If you’ve been asked to resign, your letter doesn’t refer to this; state simply that you are resigning, so that it appears that way in the official records. Offer to help find or train a replacement, if appropriate. End on a pleasant note, expressing appreciation for what you have learned, for your co-workers, for being associated with such a dynamic company, for being part of a new development. In some situations, write a one-sentence letter of resignation, giving no explanation.• In responding to a letter of resignation, include a statement of acceptance “with regret,” positive comments on the person’s association with your organization, and an expression of good wishes for the person’s future.What Not to Say• Don’t write anything in letters to employees or prospective employees that could be considered actionable. Common sense will provide some guidance, but in questionable instances, consult an attorney on the phrasing of sensitive letters (reprimands and terminations, for example).• Don’t express negative emotions. Negative facts may have to be outlined, but your letter remains objective rather than angry, vengeful, irritated, judgmental, hurt, or contemptuous. When you are overly involved emotionally, ask another person to write the letter.Tips on Writing• Be brief. Your memos and letters will be more popular (and more quickly answered) if they are concise. Check your correspondence for words, sentences, and paragraphs that can be cut without loss of clarity.• Be professional and courteous. Even when writing someone you know well, maintain a businesslike tone. Anything that gets put on paper can be saved and re-read. Although a careless remark can be forgotten, a carelessly written sentence lives forever.166 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Use parallel name forms. If you begin a letter, “Dear Hazel Mar-ston” your name at the bottom is “John Reddin.” When she is “Hazel,”you are “John.” If you feel a first name is appropriate after a job interview (“Dear Henry”), sign your first name (“Ferris”) over your typed full name (just as the other person’s name is spelled out in full in the address block).Special Situations• Send goodwill notes of congratulations and commendation to: employees who complete a project, obtain a new account, or otherwise contribute to the good of the company; co-workers and employees who are promoted or receive awards; workers marking service anniversaries; employees, co-workers, and managers celebrating personal milestones (birth of baby, marriage). These notes are the least obligatory and the most influential of office correspondence. Something as brief as “Thanks, Tom. You’re terrific” can inspire people to new heights of accomplishment.Format• Most in-house correspondence consists of memos. More official communications (promotions and resignations, for example) or letters that go in people’s files are typed on letterhead stationery.• E-mail is useful for brief nuts-and-bolts communications. Nothing confidential or important is sent this way, however.WORDSa c c o m p l i s h -achievementbehaviorcapablementscompetentconductcutbackgoalsmoraleobjectivesoperationoutstandingpoliciesprocedureprocessrecognizeregretregulationspositionsuccesssupervisetrainingPHRASESaccepted another positionafter much deliberationHOW TO SAY IT® / 167an opportunity has recently arisenappreciate having had the opportun-ity to workask you to accept my resignationcannot presently offer you any en-couragementcompany cutbacks/mergerconsidered for the position ofdue to economic conditionseliminate certain positionsexpect to fill the vacancyfinancial problems/difficulties haveforced/obliged ushave no other option but tohighly motivatedmust advise/inform younot adding to/expanding our staffat the momentproposed termination date ofsubmit/tender my resignationunder considerationvalue your contributionswith great personal regret/great re-luctance/mixed feelingsSENTENCESAccording to the terms of my contract, I hereby give four weeks’ notice that as of April 18 I am terminating my employment as freight transportation manager with Sweedlepipe, Inc.Although your credentials are impressive, we are offering the position to someone who also has the grain futures experience we are looking for.Because Don Rebura Associates was not awarded the Marryat contract, we are obliged to consider employee layoffs.I accept with pleasure the offer to join Potticary Dairy Products as institutional services manager.I am proud to be part of such a creative and enthusiastic team—I hope you are too.I’ll be happy to recommend you highly to potential employers.I’m concerned about the infractions of our safety regulations.I’m looking forward to a long and challenging association with Willard Electronics.I’ve seen your wonderfully creative and appealing display windows and want to congratulate you on your excellent work.I would like to meet with you to review the circumstances leading to my termination notice.On behalf of the management of Steenson Engineering, I am happy to inform168 / HOW TO SAY IT®you that you have been promoted to Senior Research Engineer, effective March 1.Our decision in no way reflects on your excellent qualifications.Thank you for applying for the position of commercial plant specialist with Calvert Tropical Plants.The award properly belongs to the entire department.The position for which you have applied has already been filled.This is to advise you that you are being laid off in compliance with Article XXXI, Section 6, of our current labor agreement.This letter will give formal notice of my resignation from Toddhunter Associates as Media Specialist effective April 1.Unfortunately we are not able to offer you a position with Roehampton, Ltd. at this time.We accept your resignation with regret, and wish you well in future endeavors.We are pleased to offer you the position as warehouse attendant for Landor Textiles.We are sorry to see you leave.We have received a number of responses to our advertisement, and we ask your patience while we evaluate them.We hope to be able to consider you for another position soon.We hope you will be available for recall.We will let you know/contact you/notify you/be in touch with you/write or call you about the status of your application sometime before June 1.PARAGRAPHSWe have carefully considered your letter of application, résumé, and portfolio, and have been most favorably impressed. Please call the Human Resources Office at 555-6790 to arrange an interview with Enoch Emery, the Art Director.Thank you for offering me the opportunity to work for Wedderburn Printers and Lithographers as manager of bindery services. I am delighted to accept this position with such a distinguished and forward-looking company.We are seeing more travel expenses turned in after the fact, whereas company policy states that all travel expenses must be preapproved. If you have questions about how to handle travel expenses, call Michael Lambourne in Human Resources, extension 310.We’ve received complaints that employee attempts to guard against receiving bad checks have become overly intrusive, hostile, and humili-HOW TO SAY IT® / 169ating. Several customers have said they will not return to the store. While we encourage every effort to prevent the writing of bad checks, your actions must be tactful, courteous, and respectful. Please reread your employee handbook for specific acceptable measures and for suggested phrases and actions for handling this situation.Last month, we lost $3,780 worth of clothing to shoplifters. There is an informational seminar on shoplifting scheduled for June 16 at 3:00p.m. In the meantime, we ask all employees to be especially vigilant.I am obliged to resign my position with the Van Eyck Company because of ill health. I appreciate the good employer-employee relationship we have enjoyed over the years and will be watching the company’s growth with much interest. If I can be of any assistance to my successor, I will be glad to help out.We are sorry to announce that Jeanne Beroldy has resigned from the firm effective July 1. She has accepted the position of Managing Director with Christie Packaging Corp. Although we will miss her, we wish her every success in her exciting new position.It is with much regret that we advise you that we are unable to continue your employment after September 1. As you are no doubt aware, the company is experiencing severe—but temporary, we hope—difficulties.We believe the layoff will also be temporary, although for the moment it is not possible to promise anything. In the meantime, please check with Personnel for information on letters of reference, company layoff policies, public assistance available to you until you find other employment, and career counseling.With regret we accept your resignation, effective March 1. You have been one of the company’s strongest assets for the past five years. Please accept our best wishes in your new position.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Mr. Karkeek:Thank you for your letter seeking employment with our firm.You have an interesting background. However, we feel your qualifications and experience do not match the needs of the account executive/trainee position presently available in our Chicago office.We thank you for your interest in Lessways International and wish you success in the attainment of your career objectives.Sincerely yours,Dear Elizabeth Firminger,Thank you for applying for the position of insurance adjustor with the Raybrook Adjusting Service. Your work history is outstanding, and you made a good impression at your interview. As you know, however,170 / HOW TO SAY IT®we were looking for someone with experience in the inland marine area, and we did find a candidate with that qualification.We appreciate your interest in our company, and would like to suggest that you re-apply to us in six months when we expect to have several other positions open. We will keep your application on file until then.It is clear that you will be an asset to the company that eventually hires you—good luck in finding the right place.Sincerely,Dear Marguerite Lambert,Thank you for your application for the position of litho stripper, your résumé, and your work samples. They are being carefully considered by our Human Resources Department.We received a number of other applications, so it may be three or four weeks before we can make a decision. You will be notified either way as soon as we do.Thank you for your interest in Greatheart Printing Company.Sincerely yours,Dear Ms. Moncada:As you know, I just celebrated five years with Tresham Paper Products.In that time, I’ve been stimulated by my work, supported by co-workers, and encouraged by management. I’ve enjoyed being part of the Tresham team.The recent reorganization has changed things for me, however, and I question whether the next five years will be as fruitful for me as the last five and whether I’ll be as useful to the company in my new situation.Because of this, I am accepting a position with Walter & Co., Inc., where I am assured of opportunities for advancement as well as exceptional laboratory support.Please accept my resignation, effective November 1, along with my appreciation for a satisfying and rewarding five years.Sincerely,TO: All EmployeesFROM: Lawrence Mont, Head LibrarianDATE: August 14, 2002RE: Library usageAs of September 1, all library books will be due one month from the checkout date (the previous loan period was two months). For the first several months, we will be calling this change to your attention as you check out books.HOW TO SAY IT® / 171TO: Dr. Betti LancochFROM: Caradoc EvansDATE: February 3, 2003RE: Biodegradable plastics technologyWe continue to be very interested in your biodegradable plastics technology, which appears to be the cornerstone for several new products. I understand you’re pursuing patents for this technology.We’d like to see your patent applications filed by May 1, 2003, so that we could begin customer contact to clarify performance criteria for several of the products.I want to emphasize our need for your technology along with appropriate patent protection. If you require additional support, please call.Thanks.See also: ANNOUNCEMENTS, APPOINTMENTS, APPRECIATION, CONGRATULATIONS, COVER LETTERS, FOLLOW-UP, REFERENCES, REFUSALS, RESPONSES, RÉSUMÉS, THANK YOU, WELCOME.