22Letters to Family and FriendsDo let me hear from you even if it’s only a twenty-page letter.—GROUCHO MARXAlthough inexpensive long-distance dialing has replaced some letters to family and friends, millions are still sent every year. E-mail has probably fueled writing among family and friends like nothing since the pony express.Start talking about the joy of personal letters and people will tell you about their family round-robin letter, about the grandmother who returned years of correspondence to each of her children and grandchildren, about the couple celebrating their anniversary who read aloud their first letters to each other, about high school friends who saved their letters for twenty-five years.And there are serious letters: the man whose friends flood him with letters before each chemotherapy appointment; the young woman who chooses her baby’s adoptive parents by reading letters written to her from each candidate couple; the weekly letters that are read with such pleasure by a ninety year-old uncle who can no longer hear.“How eagerly in all times and all places, have people waited for mail from home! How wistfully have they repeated, over and over again, that old familiar question: ‘Any mail for me?’” (Lillian Eichler Watson)Letters to Family and Friends Include• annual form letters (see HOLIDAYS)• correspondence with friends and relatives• letters to young people: birthdays/congratulations on an achievement/ away from home• love letters (see LOVE LETTERS)• pen pals• special-event letters (see CONGRATULATIONS, HOLIDAYS, SYMPATHY, WEDDINGS)• welcoming prospective or new in-laws (see also WELCOME) 172HOW TO SAY IT® / 173How to Say It• Open with a cheerful remark indicating you’re happy to be writing the other person.• Ask questions about the other person’s life, without, however, sounding like an interviewer.• Write about what you’ve been doing lately; books you’ve read; movies or plays you’ve seen; sports events you’ve participated in or attended; local or national politics and issues you care about; news of mutual friends; something that made you laugh; an item you just bought; plans for summer, fall, next year; the weather; changes at work; pets’ behavior; hobbies or collections. Or, choose a recent event (it needn’t be terribly important) and tell it like a story.• Close with an expression of affection or love and with a forward-looking statement about seeing or hearing from the person.What Not to Say• Don’t begin with “I don’t know why I’m writing, because I don’t have anything to say,” or “You know how I hate writing letters” or“I’m sorry for not writing sooner”—unless, of course, you can say it with wit and originality. Start your letter with a cheerful, positive, interesting remark.• Don’t write only questions and comments on the other person’s life and last letter (“Your remodeled kitchen sounds fantastic!”; “The new car sounds great.” “Your party must have been a lot of fun.”“I’ll bet you were proud of Cicely.”). Mark Van Doren says, “The letter which merely answers another letter is no letter at all.” And Sigmund Freud said, “I consider it a good rule for letterwriting to leave unmentioned what the recipient already knows, and instead tell…something new.” D. H. Lawrence added, “I love people who can write reams and reams about themselves: it seems generous.”• Don’t complain or be negative, unless you can do it entertainingly.A cheerful, positive tone is welcome (except when you or your reader have been facing difficulties).• Don’t end with “I’ve bored you long enough” or “I’d better quit before you fall asleep.” Instead, say how much you’d enjoy hearing from them when time allows or how much you miss them or, again, how happy you are about their news.Tips on Writing• Write when it is a pleasure and not a chore (unless, of course, this is never the case for you). The casual guideline about letters to family174 / HOW TO SAY IT®and friends is that short and frequent is better than long and infrequent.However, this is a matter of temperament. The general feeling is that it is delightful to get personal mail at all, and never mind whether it is short and infrequent, or otherwise.• Remember your writing teacher’s advice to “Elaborate! Elaborate!”Instead of merely reporting that you went camping, tell a story or describe something you saw so that the other person can almost see it. Almost any sentence lends itself to some kind of elaboration.• Include cartoons, newspaper clippings, snapshots, bookmarks, or other materials that are satisfying to receive and make your letter look like more than it is.• Postcards help you keep in touch when you haven’t time for a letter. Keep a stack of colorful, funny, or oldtime postcards near your letterwriting area and get in the habit of sending off a couple a week.This will make you popular and will relieve you of the guilt that unanswered mail produces in most people.Special Situations• One of the best letters to family doesn’t even need postage: the notes or drawings put in children’s lunchboxes; the note in a traveling spouse’s luggage; the letter of congratulations to a hardworking student; the simple “I love you” pinned to a bedspread. These are worth many times their weight in the gold of family harmony.• When children are in the care of adults other than their parents or guardians, they should have with them a letter authorizing emergency medical help. In the case of summer camps or day-care providers, a form for this purpose is generally provided. But if you leave your children with someone for the weekend, write: “I [name] give permission to [name of person caring for your children] to authorize any necessary medical emergency care for [name of child or children]from [date] to [date].” Sign and date the letter and give a telephone number where you can be reached.• While it is rarely a good idea to write to unknown individuals who are incarcerated, it is generally a good idea to remember family and friends who are in jail or in prison—and with whom you have a close relationship. They appreciate mail. The first several letters will be awkward, but if you can establish some neutral subjects (books, interests, hobbies, mutual friends, social issues), the letters will become easier to write with time and practice.• When dealing with strong feelings, letters are effective because they distance people from each other and from the problem while obliging them to think clearly enough to put their thoughts down on paper. However, letters can also worsen a problem. Written words are not as easily forgotten as words spoken in the heat of anger; theyHOW TO SAY IT® / 175can be reread many times by a grudge-holder. Words without accompanying gestures, smiles, and apologetic looks are colder and more inflexible. Think carefully about the temperament of the person to whom you are writing and determine an approach that the person will be able to “hear”; do not write in the heat of your strongest feelings—that is, it is good to write then, but do not mail it; reread and rewrite your letter several times over a period of days.• When writing to children: Print or type your letter; it’s easier to read. Include a stimulating, challenging, or curious statement. Relate a bit of trivia, thought problem, word puzzle, anecdote. Children enjoy being let into the adult world; tell them about something important to you—a job problem, your garden, the next election. Share your thoughts, discuss ideas, ask questions. Avoid the word “kids” (“I’m so proud of you kids!”). For their reply to you, enclose a few postcards or a self-addressed envelope with an unattached stamp (so the stamp isn’t wasted if they don’t write back). Or, construct a letter for the child to return to you that consists of boxes to check off with various made-up statements and “news.” This technique will probably net you a letter at least once. Very young children appreciate mail even if they can’t read. Keep in mind that a parent will be reading your letter aloud; things sound different that way. Include a colorful drawing or cut-out picture along with the child’s name (which many youngsters recognize early on), a picture of you, a fancy pencil, a small toy.• When writing a child who is away from home for the first time, you can say lightly, “We miss you!” but don’t emphasize how empty the house seems; some children feel responsible for their parents’feelings. Don’t detail what everyone at home is doing; that too can make a child sad. Instead, ask questions that will provide something to write back about: What time do you get up? What do you usually eat for breakfast? Do you have a swimming class? Who else lives in your cabin? Are there any animals there? Have you been in a canoe yet? What is your favorite activity? Who is your counselor? Have you made new friends?• To help your children become letterwriters: see that they receive mail themselves; supply them with small sheets of wide-lined paper and interesting pens; sit with them during the writing of their first two dozen brief notes—being with you is part of the fun; make the writing of a thank-you note a requirement for using the gift or spending the money, but let them do it at their own pace and, whenever possible, make a mini-party out of it, writing thank-you notes of your own at the same time.• Although the term “pen pal” suggests youthful letterwriters, it includes not only dedicated young correspondents but thousands of adults who write with great enthusiasm to people they’ve never met.A better term might be “pen friend.” In the beginning, be discreet about giving personal information; start with facts that most people176 / HOW TO SAY IT®know about you and reserve more private details for later in the correspondence. The main “rule” for pen friends is to be yourself. Where one person is put off by a ten-page letter from a new correspondent, another person is delighted. The person who talks only about self-centered news fascinates one person, bores the next. The letterwriter who never tells anything personal is considered discreet by some, too uptight by others. When you are being yourself you’ll find those who like you just as you are. To find a pen pal, contact one of the following organizations. International Pen Friends, based in Dublin, Ireland, has members of all ages; send a self-addressed stamped envelope to: International Pen Friends, Box 290065, Brooklyn, NY 11229-0001. Young people (ages twelve to twenty) who want to write a foreign pen pal can contact World Pen Pals, International Institute of Minnesota, 1690Como Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55108. Also for young letter-writers are: The Student Letter Exchange, Box 2465, Grand Central Station, New York, NY 10163, and The International Friendship League, 55 Mount Vernon Street, Boston, MA 02108. Some organizations charge fees.Format• Letters to family and friends can use any format you like. Acquaintances are a little different; the less well you know a person, the more formal (personal stationery, handwritten) the letter or note will be.WORDSactivitiesaffectionatelyannouncebusyeventsfriendshipfunnygoings-onhappyhealthynewspleasedproudrecentlysatisfyingtellvacationweatherPHRASESa warm hellodid you knowgood to hear from youhave you ever thought abouthave you heardhow did you manage toI enjoyed hearing aboutI hope that by nowI meant to tell youin your last letter you didn’t men-tionHOW TO SAY IT® / 177I thought you might like to knowmissing youremember the timesympathize withthinking of youwe were so happy to hear thatwe wondered ifwhat did you think ofwhatever happened towhat would you say towhen are you going toSENTENCESAre you planning to travel this summer?Have you read any good books lately?I can’t tell you how much I appreciated your letter.I’ll be counting the minutes till I see you.I’m wondering how your finals went.I think of you every day/so often.I’ve never written to anyone I didn’t know before, so let’s see how this goes!I was so glad to see your handwriting again.Please write and tell me all the news.We’d love to see pictures of the new house.We thoroughly enjoy your letters—you can’t write often enough for us.What a dear letter!Write when you have time, will you?You must send the quickest of moral support notes to me because I’m having an absolutely dreadful time at the office.You’re in my thoughts every minute of the day.Your last letter was priceless/delightful/a pleasure to receive.Your letters always brighten my day.Your letter was such fun to read—thanks!PARAGRAPHSHello! My name is Henry Earlforward and in addition to being your new pen friend I’m a bookseller by vocation and a bibliophile by avocation. I hope you like books as much as I do.I can hardly wait for summer to get here. What’s that you say? Summer has come and gone? The kids are back in school? But…but…I really don’t know where the time goes.Please say hello to everyone and tell Audrey thanks again for taking178 / HOW TO SAY IT®us out. We had a great time! Your family is so warm and fun to be around—so much energy and self-assurance! I miss you all!I’m sorry about this one-size-fits-all letter, but my negligence in corresponding with all of you finally got so oppressive that I had to take immediate steps. These immediate steps have taken me almost three weeks. Meanwhile, my brand-new personal computer was crying out,“Use me! Use me!” Then…Eureka! Hoover!…this letter was conceived and executed.Will wonders never cease? Hannah is finally sprouting some teeth—believe it or don’t. I mean she’s only seventeen months old! I was beginning to wonder if kids need teeth to get into first grade. Well, those teeth may have been slow in coming but at least they brought out the monster in her for four months. Actually she’s been pretty good considering how sore her mouth must be.This evening we’re having our first interview with a private adoption agency—at home, in my natural habitat. Next week we start paying them money and attend a two-day workshop. Then the following week there’s another two-day workshop, then more interviews—all this to complete a home study. After that the search begins and could take anywhere from one day to eighteen months. It makes me nervous in the service because it’s such a big step, but I think we’re ready for it. Keep us in your thoughts!SAMPLE LETTERSDear Angela and Tom,Parlez-vous français? That means “Sorry I haven’t written lately.” It all started when I ran out of lined paper at my office. I hate trying to write on this blank stuff, it’s like trying to drive on a snow-covered road, only a little safer.So how’s the world treating you these days? We are winding down from another busy summer and hoping for a beautiful and serene fall.Whoever coined the phrase “lazy days of summer” ought to have their vital signs checked. I mean, who are we kidding here?Both Kalli and Lauren are taking a gymnastics class, so we spend a lot of after-dinner time in the yard practicing what they are learning, with me as their “equipment.” But it’s fun, at least until the mosquitoes begin setting up their derricks.I had a busy summer at the office, but September is slow as usual. The kids are back in school, the farmers are busy, and bow-hunting season is here. It’s actually a nice pace although hard on the budget. I think I would enjoy dentistry a lot more if I didn’t have to make money at it.I’m manager of our softball team this season. It’s one of those things that doesn’t sound like much, and shouldn’t be, but is. I’d rate it about a 9.8 on the headache scale (of 10). We are winning at 11-3 and tied forHOW TO SAY IT® / 179first in our twelve-team league, but, honestly, the manager has nothing to do with that. Now if we were losing, then it would be my fault. The hardest part is collecting money from people for various things and making a lot of phone calls.Well, that’s all for now. Say hello to the kids for me.With love,Dear Mrs. K.,It was so nice to hear from you. I wish we could have had a longer visit at Easter. This semester has gone by so quickly—there are only three weeks left. Maybe we can get together when I come home for the summer.I know you don’t watch TV, so I’ll tell you what Oprah Winfrey said.The average cost of a wedding is $13,000. Can you believe that? Mom tried to break the news to Daddy. He guessed the average wedding cost was $700 to $1,000. Poor Daddy.Because thereisgoing to be a wedding! We think next year. Can you believe I’ve written a whole page and haven’t mentioned the love of my life? Jeff is fine, and sends his love too.With a hug,Subj: Just keepin’ in touchDate: 04-05-05 13:43:52 EDTFrom: md@email.comTo: rm@email.comHi mom. Of course I’m alive. Had you doubts? I hardly think that three days without hearing from me justifies using capital letters.Dear Fritz,And how is my favorite uncle? Your letter came the other day and it was one of the nicest I’ve gotten in a long time. It was great seeing you over Christmas break.Baseball is now in full swing (get it?), and we’re running sprints every morning by 6:00 a.m. By 10:00 we’re hitting off the machine. I can’t wait for the weather to clear up so we can go outside to do all this.Tell everybody “Hi” for me, and if Liz has any questions about college, she can write me. I can’t answer them all but tell her the first quarter of the first year is the toughest, and it’s all downhill after that!Love,Dear Lettie,We all enjoyed your last letter, and have taped the cartoons up on the refrigerator.Somewhere I read that life, to a five-year-old, is full of alternatives.180 / HOW TO SAY IT®Tommy is forever asking, “Mommy, would you rather have me get eaten by an alligator, bonked on the head, or fall out of a skyscraper window?”I went bargain hunting at some rummage sales last weekend. I guess you could say I got my limit. The Lamberts were here for two days along with their poodle, Muffy (French for “lint ball,” isn’t it?).I bought a generic fruit punch that says one of its ingredients is “natural punch flavoring.” What is a punch? I assume it grows on trees, and I’m guessing it needs a warm climate.We’re having a party Friday night—twenty-two people. It’s been the best way I’ve discovered to get the spring cleaning done.This letter is more disjointed than most. I guess I don’t try often enough to harness a thought, and now that I’m trying, my fingers are too weak to hold the reins. You like my metaphor? I ought to be a writer.Give my love to everyone!Subj: Friday morningDate: 96-02-23 13:24:46 ESTFrom: mdk@email.comTo: rmk@email.comI will medley for you when I plane in to the Cities. Who’s going to car me home from the airport? I’m going to go CD now.Dear Wu Sung,This is my first experiment with writing to someone I’ve never met.It’s a good thing that you speak (and write) English or this wouldn’t be possible. Unfortunately I don’t speak any other languages, not even Spanish, which I took for two years in high school.To help us get to know each other, I’m sending you a few things that show my little corner of the world: a road map, postcards, a small travel book about Chicago, some pages from this morning’s newspaper that tell what’s going on in Chicago these days, and some pictures of my family, my apartment, and our cat, Mulch.I work in a bank, so in my next letter I’ll send a picture of the bank, some brochures describing its features, and tell you a little about what I do there.I look forward to hearing about you and your corner of the world!Dear Christopher,Congratulations on doing such a good job on your term paper. I read it through twice and learned so much. I’m not surprised you got an A+on it. I especially liked the way you paced yourself on this long drawn-out project. I remember you starting your note cards back in February, and then working on it steadily all spring. I’m impressed!Love,HOW TO SAY IT® / 181MomSee also: ADVICE, ANNIVERSARIES, APOLOGIES, CONGRATULATIONS, “GET WELL,” HOLIDAYS, LOVE LETTERS, SYMPATHY, THANKYOU, WEDDINGS, WELCOME.