23Faxed LettersWith the only certainty in our daily existence being change, and a rate of changegrowing always faster in a kind of technological leapfrog game,speed helps people think they are keeping up.—GAIL SHEEHYThe fax (short for facsimile machine) has become indispensable to many individuals and businesses, increasing the speed of communication and changing our idea of “response time” from days to minutes. It scans letters, converts the words and graphics to signals that can be sent over telephone lines, and transmits them to a machine at the other end, where the process is reversed. Like a photocopying machine, it works only with already prepared documents.A letter sent by fax is like any other letter. However, once it’s been typed or printed and signed, it’s inserted in the fax machine. No folding it, addressing an envelope, putting the letter in the envelope, sealing it, stamping it—and waiting several days for it to reach your addressee.The appeal is obvious.However, the virtue of the faxed page is its speed, not its good looks.Some fax paper is not appealing aesthetically. The print can be blurry or smudged or at times illegible, depending on the quality of the original document and the machines used to transmit it.Fax Letters When• communicating overseas• someone is difficult to reach by phone• speed is the principal factor• the appearance of the document is not an issue• you’ve been requested toHow to Say It• Determine whether faxing is indicated. If you and your addressee agree you need a speedy transferal of data or information, it is the best choice.182HOW TO SAY IT® / 183• Write your letter as carefully as you would if you were putting it in an envelope and sending it by mail.• Include on a cover sheet or the first page of your fax: the recipient’s name, department, and fax number; your name along with information on how to contact you (fax number, e-mail address, company name and address, phone number); the number of pages being faxed (include the cover sheet in your count).What Not to Say• Don’t send thank-you letters by fax unless you know the other person well; doing it this way parcels out the cost of the thank you between sender and recipient. It’s also not very heartwarming.• Don’t send confidential or sensitive information by fax, unless you’re certain your intended recipient will collect it on the other end. Anyone can read your letter while the fax machine is printing it or while it waits to be picked up by your recipient. Ads may say, “Please fax confidential résumé,” but it is better to assume that confidentiality is not absolute.Tips on Writing• Handwritten letters or notes don’t make satisfactory faxes; printed copy is the norm.• Use a readable font. A 10-point size is the minimum; 12-point is better.• When the page being faxed is important, send the fax for instant reception but mail the hard copy at the same time so the other person has a decent-looking original. (You may want to note at the bottom of the letter that this is a confirmation of a fax sent on such-and-such a date.)• Read over faxes before sending; they can constitute legally binding documents.• Don’t fax something that has been faxed several times; each transmission reduces its sharpness, making it hard to read and unap-pealing. Any fax that looks a little fuzzy when you get it is going to look worse after you send it on. To see what your letter will look like when faxed to the recipient, run it through your fax machine on copy mode. The result is about what they’ll get.• When faxing letters or documents with small, dense print, adjust your resolution to “superfine.” The document will be easier to read and the transmittal time will be increased only slightly.• Keep in mind that the fax machine reads everything. Heavy fonts, graphics, borders, icons all increase transmission time and, on the other end, gobble up ink.184 / HOW TO SAY IT®• If you rely heavily on the fax machine, it is thrifty and efficient to design letterhead stationery that will accommodate information needed for faxing. Experiment with different ink colors, letterheads, fonts, and logos in order to find the ones that look best after being faxed.You can then do away with the cover page, saving yourself and your recipient time, paper, and phone costs.• For fine-tuning your faxed letters, see Audrey Glassman’sCan IFax a Thank-You Note?Special Situations• Faxing is useful for correspondence with people in other time zones. Many foreign hotels now routinely request that reservations be made by fax. Faxes have all the immediacy of a telephone call but are less expensive.• Faxes are being used for sending routine information quickly: receiving/confirming/changing orders, invoices, shipping information, specifications, quotes, and corrections to contracts or proposals in process. When faxes are legible, this has proved to be convenient and cost-effective.• Faxing has made possible long-distance business transactions where documents are sent to someone to be signed or initialed and faxed back. In many cases an original signature is eventually needed, but this allows the transaction to proceed in a timely manner.• Faxing unrequested sales messages is not appreciated. Theoretically someone could fax a sales letter to all the fax numbers they find.However, this means recipients pay to receive something they didn’t request. Although most of us have learned to live with unsolicited third-class mail, we would not be pleased to have to pay to receive it.Because it costs the recipient to receive a fax, be sure the person welcomes it.• Faxing résumés and application letters has become acceptable to many companies and actively solicited by others. Faxing a résumé or letter of application in such cases is appropriate and probably necessary since other applicants will be faxing theirs. However, at this stage in the technology of fax machines, your résumé won’t look as professional as a mailed original.• Faxes can be sent to anyone who has a fax machine—and to anyone who doesn’t. People without a machine of their own send and receive faxes at photocopy centers. To send, bring in the letter or pages to be faxed while you wait. Don’t take stapled items; this annoys copy shop personnel since pages are sent one at a time. To receive, notify your correspondent of the store’s fax number and advise them to put your name and phone number at the top of the fax so the store can call you when it arrives.HOW TO SAY IT® / 185Format• A faxed letter uses standard letterhead or memo stationery.• Small preprinted fax information forms are available to stick onto the first page of your letter or memo, thus making the cover sheet unnecessary. This only works, however, when there’s room on the page for the form.WORDSattachedconfirmcorrectionfollowingforwardimmediatelyinstructionspromptquicklyrequestrushsendspeedytransmittalurgentPHRASESadditional instructionsas soon as possibleas you requested/at your requestbecause of the tight deadlineby return faxby this afternoonhappy to be able to sendI need a response bypass alongplease acknowledge receiptprice quotationprompt replythe information you requestedto advise youto speed your applicationtransmittal problemsvia facsimile transmission and U.S.mailSENTENCESBelow are the figures you need for the meeting this afternoon.Here is the missing paragraph for my newsletter piece.I authorize you to debit my credit card in the amount of $4000 (card number, signature, and date below).I’d appreciate a call at 555-4234 when you receive this.I’m sorry about the rush, but I’d appreciate it if you could look over this press release and let me know by noon if it’s all right with you.186 / HOW TO SAY IT®In response to your ad for an estimator at your headquarters office, I am faxing you my résumé.Let me know if you have any problems reading this.Please have the current owners and the buyers sign below to indicate that they have received this disclosure, and then fax it back to this office.Please read and initial the attached rider to your contract # 007945.This will confirm the arrangements for delivery of order # C18803 made on the telephone this morning.We were ready to starting printing when Itzik Landsman pointed out that these figures don’t make sense—will you check them and get back to us right away?You may use this form to respond.Your Peterkin Turkeys will be delivered today between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m.Please check the delivery against the attached order, sign to acknowledge receipt, and return the signed order form to us.PARAGRAPHSYour good faith estimate of closing costs is attached. Please read it and call me with any questions. I’d like to get a final copy typed up this afternoon. Thanks.Bettina Vanderpoel has provided us with the necessary figures and documents. Please check the attached statement for errors or inconsist-encies and fax it back with your corrections as soon as you can. Before 3:00 today would be helpful. Thanks!O.A. Pardiggle Termite, Inc. Wood destroying pests and organisms inspection report for 1711 Grismer # 6. Please read, sign, and return ASAP.Can you let us know by this afternoon if you can supply us with one hundred (100) pool-testing kits from stock? We need them immediately.Is there a possibility of one-or two-day delivery? I assume this purchase would fall under your bulk-rate (10%) discount.I’m faxing both you and your lawyer a copy of the revised contract.If you leave a message on my voice mail or fax me back with an okay, I can overnight the original copies of the contract to you for your signature first thing Monday morning. I’m looking forward to working with you.Please complete the attached Uniform Commercial Loan Application, responding to all fields marked with an X. Sign and return by 9/23.SAMPLE LETTERSTO: William Marling, ManagerHOW TO SAY IT® / 187FAX: 715/555-2033FROM: Lettice WatsonTELEPHONE/FAX: 715/555-4355PAGES FAXED: 2I’ve just learned that you have an immediate opening for a sales associate in your casino products store.As indicated on the résumé on the next page, I’ve worked in sales for the past four years.I would like to set up an appointment to discuss this position with you.Thank you for your time and attention.Dr. Grimesby RoylottFax # 818/555-3232February 7, 2001Dear Dr. Roylott,I’m working on the brochure for our next conference on plastic and reconstructive surgery and I don’t have a professional bio for you.Will you fax us one (about a paragraph in length) as soon as possible?Thanks. Our fax number is 616/555-4687.FROM: Valentine WannopSecurity SystemsFax # 212/555-1443TO: Christopher TietjensFax # 212/555-4877PAGES SENT: 2Chris, I need to turn in the attached meeting announcement this afternoon. Is everything correct? Thanks. Val TO: Customer Service, Vesson JewelersFROM: Mary WebbDATE: August 12, 2003RE: Order # 189441, catalog item # 43A-8215PAGES SENT: 2The second sheet of this fax is the page from your catalog that shows the wristwatch I recently ordered. Although the catalog number agrees with the catalog number of the watch I received, the watch itself bears no resemblance to the one pictured. Instead it matches the description of your catalog item # 431-8255.1 need this watch for a birthday gift188 / HOW TO SAY IT®on August 16. Please send instructions immediately on how to rectify the situation before then. Thank you.TO: Lambert StretherStrether Medical SupplyFax 612/555-2566FROM: Chadwick NewsomeNewsome Mfg. Co., Inc.Fax 715/555-2534RE: Order # LSX-655-12211DATE: Oct. 12, 2002The above-referenced shipment should have arrived before noon today and did not. Are we scheduled to receive it this afternoon? Let me know. We were assured we would have it today. Thanks.See also: MEMOS.