24Follow-Up LettersBulldogs have been known to fall on their swordswhen confronted by my superior tenacity.—MARGARET HALSEYWriting a follow-up letter on the heels of an earlier letter, conversation, or meeting is a graceful way of tying up a loose end, reminding someone to carry through on a promised action, or building on something that went before. Sometimes you need to write several follow-up letters. Combine your bulldog tenacity with charm and originality, and you will achieve your goal.Letitia Baldrige, the New York writer of etiquette books and former White House social secretary, encourages following up meetings and lunches with letters. “This little personal touch, which takes three minutes, makes an enormous impression,” she says. “The ones who do it regularly in business are such standouts. They’re the ones who jump ahead.”Write a Follow-Up Letter to• amplify material in your original sales letter after it brings a response (order, expression of interest, request for more information)• confirm a meeting date, a telephone or other oral agreement, a message left with a third party• express appreciation and acknowledge what was accomplished at a business lunch, dinner, or meeting• express appreciation and the hopes that they are interested to someone who has visited your school, university, college, or organization as an applicant• express your appreciation and impressions after a visit to a school, university, or college or after attending a meeting as a guest or potential member• inquire whether your unacknowledged gift arrived• reinforce sales visits or demonstrations• remind someone of an appointment, meeting, favor, request, inquiry, invitation, payment, or work deadline189190 / HOW TO SAY IT®• remind someone that you are waiting for answers, information, confirmation, or merchandise that you wrote about earlier• send omitted or supplemental material or to revise an earlier correspondence• someone who has not responded to a sales letter or product literature• someone who hasn’t returned your telephone call• sum up what was accomplished in a meeting or interview so that there is a record and so that your view of what went on can be verified by others• thank someone for a job interview• verify with a customer that a shipping problem or missing order has been settled to their satisfactionHow to Say It• State why you are writing (“I haven’t heard from you”; “I wanted to remind you”).• Refer to the key idea (the meeting, your last letter, the unacknowledged gift).• Thank the person for the interest shown or tie your purpose in writing to your last contact with them. If necessary, remind the person who you are (“We met last week at the performance boats trade show”) or what your telephone discussion was about.• Tell what you want the person to do: acknowledge receipt of merchandise, telephone you, send payment, reply to an earlier letter.• Close with an expression of appreciation for the person’s time and attention, or with a forward-looking statement about further business or contacts.What Not to Say• Don’t imply your reader is thoughtless or negligent when writing about an unanswered letter or unacknowledged gift. Although the possibility of mail going astray is slim, you must allow for it. Even if the recipient is at fault, it is neither good manners nor good business to point this out.• A follow-up letter should not simply repeat earlier information (except in the case of confirming an oral agreement or discussion). You need an identifiable reason for writing, such as sending new information, requesting a response, making a special offer, thanking for a previous order or meeting.HOW TO SAY IT® / 191Tips on Writing• When writing a follow-up letter to an unanswered request, query, or letter, repeat your original message (or include a copy of it). Go into a little more detail on the importance of the person’s response.• Some offices maintain a tickler file. When sending a letter (inviting someone to speak at the awards banquet, for example), make a note on the calendar a week or two later to verify that you’ve heard from the person. Letters awaiting responses can be kept together, arranged by the date when a follow-up letter should be sent.• When sending a follow-up letter to an unacknowledged statement or invoice, include the necessary information (amount, account number, date due, days past due) with a simple notice, “A brief reminder.”This is often all it takes since some late payments are oversights. (If this letter brings no response, see COLLECTION.)Special Situations• After interviewing for a job, send a follow-up letter immediately, before a decision has been reached. “A follow-up letter after a job interview can often be the extra push that gets you the job.” (Harold E.Meyer) State that you enjoyed the interview and restate your abilities and your interest in the position. Emphasize a particular strong point.If there were any misunderstandings or any points you failed to clarify during the interview, you can remedy the situation in this letter. Close with your thanks and a courtesy such as “I look forward to hearing from you.”• If, following an interview, you are not offered the position, write a follow-up letter anyway. Thank the person for their time, tactfully express your disappointment, ask that they keep your résumé on file, and close with an appreciation of the person and the company.• When someone fails to acknowledge your gift, write a follow-up letter (about eight weeks after sending the gift). Describe the gift.Business gifts are often opened by staff rather than by the intended recipient and wedding gifts can be easily misidentified. Adopt a neutral tone, emphasizing your concern about receipt of the gift rather than negligence in acknowledging it.• When a meeting or event has been scheduled months in advance, it’s helpful to send follow-up notes reminding people. Repeat all the information along with a pleasant remark about hoping to see them.• Follow-up sales letters are essential. Write promptly, while the customer is still thinking about the presentation, earlier sales message, or visit from a sales representative. Write after a customer requests a brochure, stops by your booth at a trade fair, calls with a question, or responds to an ad. Follow-up letters are also sent when you receive192 / HOW TO SAY IT®no response to a sales letter. Refer to the earlier contact (“I wrote you several weeks ago to tell you about…” or “Did you receive the certificate we sent you, good for…?”), thank the person for their interest or the time they gave you, add something new to the overall message, emphasize the one or two features the person seemed most taken with during your presentation, reinforce your original strong selling points, and suggest an action: place an order, call you, call a toll-free number, accept a trial subscription, use the enclosed discount offer. If this is a second letter, emphasize a different benefit or aspect of your product or service. This letter is also shorter or longer than the first and perhaps different in tone. Although all these can be called follow-up letters, they are primarily sales letters.• Successful businesses keep in touch with customers after they purchase products or services, sending follow-up letters to see how things are working out, to inform customers of new product lines, to remind them that you appreciated their business in the past and hope to serve them again.• After a meeting or conference call, write a follow-up letter to the other participants. Outline the issues discussed and decisions made in order to provide a written record of what was said. InThe 100 MostDifficult Business Letters You’ll Ever Have to Write, Fax, or E-mail,Bernard Heller recommends writing a follow-up letter or memo when you want to be certain the ideas you contributed in a meeting are credited to you. He suggests saying that you’ve had some further thoughts on the ideas you submitted and that you think it’s a good idea to get all of them down on paper; “This is the gist of the ideas I offered. A detailed explanation of each one is on the pages that follow.” Patricia King(Never Work for a Jerk!)suggests giving a written summary of meetings and conferences to your boss and keeping one in your own file.Format• Most business follow-up letters are typed on letterhead or memo stationery. Social letters or brief reminder-type notes can be handwritten.• Although not widely used, “to remind” cards can be sent to follow up a telephone invitation. Handwrite the information in regular invitation format on printed cards, foldovers, or personal stationery: “This is to remind you that Mr. and Mrs. Louis Rony expect you on…”WORDSacknowledgeconfirmfeedbackinformHOW TO SAY IT® / 193mentionnotifypromptrememberremindrepeatreplyresponsereviewsuggestsummarizePHRASESabout a month ago, we senta little/brief reminderyou/wrote you aboutam writing to remind you thatappreciate your interest inas I have not heard from youas I mentioned on the phone thismorningas mentioned in your letteras we agreed yesterdaybeginning to wonder if you receivedI am still interested inif you want further documentationI know how busy you are, soonin reference/reply/response tojog your memoryjust a note to remind youmake sure you’re aware ofnow that you’ve had time to con-prompt you tosider/review/familiarize yourself withsince we haven’t heard from youthank you for your letter telling usaboutthought you might like to be re-mindedSENTENCESAfter visiting with you at the textile trade convention last week, I telephoned Yvonne Dorm, our representative in your area, and asked her to call on you.Did you receive the Blake River catalog and discounted price list that you requested?I am writing to follow up on our conversation about the three-party agreement among Clara Hittaway, Amelia Fawn, and Georgiana Fawn.I appreciate the time you gave me last week to demonstrate our unique Lammeter Integrated Phone Service System.I enjoyed visiting with you last week when you stopped in to pick up some brochures at Spina Travel Consultants.194 / HOW TO SAY IT®If you did not receive my materials, I would be happy to send you another set.I’m wondering if you received my telephone message last week.It occurred to me that I haven’t received confirmation that you received the report mailed on June 4—could you let me know on the enclosed, self-addressed postcard?It’s so unlike you not to have responded that I suspect you didn’t receive the wedding invitation.I wanted to follow up on our phone conversation of yesterday.I wanted to make sure you’re aware of the service warranty on your new microwave.Just a note to see if you received the message I left for you Friday.Now that you have had a chance to tour the proposed site, I’d like to set a date to discuss our options.On February 7, I sent a questionnaire to you on the departmental reorganization.Reminder: staff meeting 3:30 p.m. Thursday in the teachers’ lounge.Thank you for letting me help you with the purchase of your new home, which I hope you are enjoying—I’m enclosing my business card in case I can be of further service to you or to anyone you know.Thank you for taking the time this morning to describe the media buyer position, to show me around the complex, and to introduce me to other members of your staff.PARAGRAPHSI was delighted to meet with you at your home and hear your thoughts about our community. The best part of running for the Bonville City Council is the opportunity to talk with neighbors like you about our future. Please call my office with your concerns, and remember to vote on November 7!On October 26, I submitted to you a letter of application in response to your advertisement for a moldmaker. I hope you have not yet filled the position and that you are considering my application. Could you please let me know where you are in this process? Thank you.I’m looking forward to having dinner with you Friday evening. I’ll be waiting in the lobby of the Rosalba Hotel at 7:00 p.m. See you then!Several weeks ago we sent you a packet of informational materials on Topaz Island Resort. Now that you’ve had a chance to look over the color photographs of our unique vacation paradise, would you like to reserve vacation time in one of the ultra-modern cabins? Our spaces fill up quickly after the first of the year, so make your choice soon!HOW TO SAY IT® / 195Thank you for the courtesy and interest you showed me yesterday when I stopped in to inquire about the opening for a child care advocate.I didn’t expect to do more than pick up an application form, so it was a pleasure to discuss the job with you. As you could probably tell from our conversation, I am very interested in the position and believe I am well qualified for it. I’ll have my references and résumé in the mail to you by the end of the week.As you know, the Norrington Trolley and Lunch Tour will begin its expanded summer schedule on June 2. Please let me know if we are on schedule to have the new seat covers installed by the May 25 date we agreed on. Thank you.I know you’ve been especially busy these last few weeks trying to settle into your new home, but I’d like to make sure that you received a package I mailed you a month ago. It was a housewarming gift, of course.I did insure it, so if it’s lost I can have a tracer put on it. Do let me know, won’t you, if it hasn’t shown up?SAMPLE LETTERSTO: Johannes RohnFROM: Oren CornellDATE: February 10, 2003We have not yet received your year-end report. I’m enclosing a copy of my original letter and another copy of the report form. Please complete it and turn it in as soon as possible. We now have all the evaluations but yours, and need to process them before the winter recess.Dear Ms. Collen:We hope you are as pleased with your Safe-Home Security System as we were pleased to install it for you. Let us know if you experience any problems in these first few months. Very few of our customers do, but we’re available if anything should come up.You did not choose to purchase our Monthly Inspection Service at this time. However, if you change your mind, we can easily arrange it for you.It was a pleasure doing business with you!Sincerely yours,Dear Mr. Ayrton,Just a note to remind you that I still haven’t received my copy of the Brodie contract. It’s probably in the mail, but with December being such a busy month, I thought I’d mention it.Sincerely,196 / HOW TO SAY IT®Dear Julia Avery:I’m wondering if you received my letter of January 14 asking you to speak at the Society of Professional Engineers meeting to be held May 3. We are still interested in having you present your recent work to the group.If you did not receive my letter or if you would like additional information, please call me collect at 612/555-6613. We expect to send the program to the printers by the end of the month.Sincerely yours,Dear Ms. Edelman:On September 16, I sent you my résumé and reprints of several articles I have authored in response to your classified ad for a career services specialist.As I have had no response, I wonder if you received my materials.Enclosed is a self-addressed stamped postcard. Would you please indicate whether my materials were received by you and, if not, if you are still interested in seeing them?Thank you.Sincerely,See also: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, APPRECIATION, CREDIT, EMPLOYMENT, RESPONSES, SALES, THANK YOU.