25Fundraising LettersIn the end, raising money is basically a matter of going out thereand asking. There are no shortcuts.—GEORGETTE MOSBACHERIntense and growing competition for the charitable dollar means that your fundraising letter has to pack the maximum of persuasion and appeal in the minimum of words. In the average home mailbox, fundraising appeals will outnumber every kind of letter except sales letters. How do you convince readers to setyourletter aside for a contribution?It helps if you are writing on behalf of a long-established organization with a good reputation. Beyond that, your best strategy is vigorous writing: compelling anecdotes, easily grasped and persuasive statistics, thought-provoking metaphors, testimonials from familiar public figures, dynamic verbs, and well-worded appeals to heart and purse. One way of learning to write strong fundraising letters is to study effective sales letters.Fundraising Letters Include• asking for volunteers to help fundraise• follow-up letters after initial appeal (see FOLLOW-UP)• invitations: benefits/balls/banquets/fundraising events• political campaign fundraising• requests for contributions• responses to fundraising letters (see ACCEPTANCES, REFUSALS, RESPONSES)• thanks for contributing (see THANK YOU)How to Say It• Excite the reader’s interest with an attention-getting opening.• Clearly identify the organization.• Describe the organization quickly and colorfully enough to retain the reader’s interest: what it does and for whom, how it is unique, what its most impressive achievements are.197198 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Establish a compelling and urgent need for the reader’s help.• Appeal to the heart by the use of anecdotes, quotations, testimonials, case histories, descriptions.• Appeal to the head by use of facts, statistics, information.• Tell specifically how the person’s contribution will be used (“With your help, we want to offer college scholarships to an additional twenty students this year”).• Mention the benefits of contributing (personal satisfaction, alleviation of suffering, improving the community, bettering someone’s prospects, offering a tax deduction, providing entry to a select group of givers, resulting in recognition or publicity, allowing them to share some of their surplus, responding to a cause they believe in).• Establish the credibility of the organization and assure readers that their contributions will be used effectively.• Thank readers for their interest, attention, time, concern.• Make it easy to give by including a postage-paid reply envelope or a toll-free number where contributions can be made by credit card.• Have the letter signed by the highest-ranking member of your organization or by a well-known public figure.• Add a postscript emphasizing a new or strong point.What Not to Say• Don’t ask questions or suggest that your reader think about something. Build from one strong message to another without interrupting your sequence to give the reader a chance to reflect, “argue back,”or rationalize.• Don’t allow a subtly harassing or moralizing tone to creep into your letter. People who feel strongly about a cause often think others“should” contribute, and this attitude colors their message. Potential contributors cannot be shamed or manipulated into giving; they prefer to believe their contribution is a free-will offering springing from their own higher impulses, not from your pressure.• Don’t use clichés if you can help it: “We need your help”; “Why read this letter?”; “You don’t know me, but…”; “Send your check today!”;“Please take a few minutes to read this letter.” You can distinguish clichés only by reading hundreds of fundraising letters, but it is worthwhile to do so to see what works and what doesn’t.• Don’t use gimmicks such as unusual typefaces, extensive underlining or capitalization, colorful inks, or odd page layouts. A strong message is key, and gimmicks will not help a weak one and will undercut a strong one. Fundraising appeals today, however, are using strategies such as what appears to be a handwritten note on the envelope, a smaller enclosed letter, or an incentive that is either enclosed or offered.HOW TO SAY IT® / 199Tips on Writing• Be positive. Rather than describe how bad the situation will be if the reader doesn’t contribute, describe how much improved the situation will be if the reader does contribute.• Be specific. Your support evidence is specific (instead of “Every night in this country children go to bed hungry,” write, “Every night in this, the richest country in the world, one child in four goes to bed hungry”). Make a specific request (“Please send a check today”) or ask for a specific amount (“Your $100 will plant four new trees”).• Be as brief as possible. You have only seconds to make an impact.•Convey a sense of urgency. The reader must not only give, but givenow.The letter that gets set aside to be dealt with later often doesn’t get dealt with at all. Ask for an immediate response and include at least one good reason for doing so.• Establish a bond between you and your reader or between your organization and the reader (“As a parent/teacher/physician, you understand what it means to…”).• Herschell Gordon Lewis, author ofHow to Write Powerful FundRaising Letters,says, “The strongest word in fundraising is ‘you.’”Check your letter to see which occurs more often: “you” or “we” (or“I”).• Divide your message into two parts. First, give the reader a vivid picture of what is possible: healthy, well-nourished children; an active community center; eradication of a disease; a new library. Second, tell the reader exactly how you plan to arrive at the previously painted picture. Your vision statement has an emotional, subjective appeal; your mission statement is factual and objective.• A fundraising letter can begin by asking the reader to take some action (sign a petition, call a legislator, vote on an issue, participate in a letter-writing campaign) and then later in the letter ask for a contribution as well.• Most serious contributors are interested in how organizations use their money. Enclose an annual report or fact sheet telling what percentage of funds go to administrative costs and what is spent on the organization’s main activities. Credibility and accountability are serious issues for fundraisers.• The P.S. is more likely to be read than any other part of your letter, and letters with a P.S. have higher response rates than those without.The attention-getting P.S. is brief (less than five lines) and urges the person to take action immediately, expresses appreciation for the person’s help and interest, or adds one more persuasive bit of information. More is not better in this case; two postscripts are weaker than one.• A series of fundraising letters, each with a different emphasis, is200 / HOW TO SAY IT®often effective because when one angle doesn’t rouse an individual, another might.Special Situations• When inviting people to benefits and fundraising events, use the appropriate invitation form (see INVITATIONS), but be clear about what is expected of those who accept (“$100 donation suggested” or“Tax-deductible contribution of $500 per couple suggested”). Your wording may be limited by the allowable meanings of “tax deductible”and “donation.”• When writing to ask someone to be part of a fundraising committee, spell out exactly what you expect of the person as well as a description of the fundraising efforts and the overall campaign goals (financial and publicity).Format• The vast majority of fundraising letters are form letters. Although one might not expect people to respond to a generic request, these letters do in fact raise large sums for their organizations. Well-written form letters are not only acceptable but effective. The audience you target with this form letter is important to your success, however.Direct mail solicitation will be less effective than letters directed to members of specific groups or personal letters written to individuals.• Personal letters of appeal on business letterhead are effective but questionable. They should be written only with the express approval of your employer.• Fundraising letters are not sent by e-mail or fax.WORDSadvocateaidappealaskassistanceauspicesbackingbefriendbenefactorbenefitbequestcharitycompassionatecontributioncooperationdonationdonorencourageendowessentialfavorfosterfurnishgiftgivegrantgratefulhelphumanenecessityneedofferopen-handedparticipatepartnershippatronageHOW TO SAY IT® / 201petitionphilanthropicpromotepublic-spiritedreliefrequestrescuesharesolicitsponsorshipsubsidysupplysupporttributeunsparingurgentPHRASESa campaign to stop/protect/encour-acquaint you withage/supportadopt the cause ofall you have to do isas generous as possibleas soon as you canbe good enough tobroad program of servicescall upon you forcan bring comfort to those in needofchampion ofcome to the aid ofconsider carefullycontinue our effortscounting on your contributiondeserves your thoughtful considera-tiondirect your attention tofinancial backingfor the sake ofgive assistancegood/guardian angelhave the goodness tohelping handhumanitarian interestsI am confident that we canin order to provide the necessaryfundsit can make all the difference forjoin forcesmake room in your heart formake this possibleon account/behalf ofour immediate needs areplease join your friends and neigh-pressing needbors in supportingrising costsshaping the futurespecial cause/program/needstruggling with a worldwide short-age ofthere are no funds presently avail-the time has never been better to/forable forthis program really works becausethose less fortunate than youurgently need you towelfare of others202 / HOW TO SAY IT®with open handswithout your contributionworking together, we canyour contribution will enableyour donation will make it possibleyour past/unselfish generosityforyour tax-deductible giftSENTENCESAlmost all the money we need to help preserve the Bradgate River Valley comes from people like you.Any amount/contribution is most welcome/appreciated.Before we can begin raising funds for the new annex, we need volunteers to help with the mailing—will you consider giving several hours of your time to help out?But without your help, it cannot be done.Do it now, please!Help us work for a solution to this most tragic disease.Here’s how you can help.I am troubled by the growing incidence of violence in our society, and I know you are too.If each family gave only $7.50 we could meet our goal of $5,000.I’ll call you next week to see if you can help.I’m writing to ask you to join our campaign.I need your immediate help to make sure our legislation continues to progress despite a fierce lobbying campaign against it.In order to take advantage of bulk prices, we need to raise $10,000 before May 1.It can be done!I thank you from the bottom of my heart.It is people like you who make the world a better place.I want to share a story with you that illustrates for me what heroism is all about.I want to tell you about the progress you have made possible.I will truly appreciate whatever you can give, and I know these young scholars will too.Join us today.Last year, your contribution helped more than 3,000 students come closer to their dream of a liberal arts education.HOW TO SAY IT® / 203Not a dime of your contribution will be wasted.Now, more than ever, your continued support is needed to help keep the doors open.Only by working together can we make a difference.Our deadline for raising $50,000 is April 1—could you please send your gift by then?Please be as generous as you can.Please encourage your friends and neighbors to call legislators, sign a petition, contribute funds.Please mail your tax-deductible check in the enclosed postage-paid envelope.Please respond quickly and generously.Please take some time to read the enclosed brochure.P.S. Write your check and make your phone call today.Thanks for whatever you can do.The Cypros Food Shelf presently faces a crisis.The people of Port Breedy are counting on you.The Raybrook Foundation is at a financial crossroads this year and we critically need your generous giving to sustain the important work we’ve begun.We are looking to people like you to help us provide the dollars we need to continue out hospice program.We invite you to become part of the Annual Giving Campaign.We’ve accomplished a great deal, but much more must be done.Whatever you decide to send, please send it today—the situation is urgent.When you contribute to the Belknap Foundation, you invest in the future.You don’t have to give until it hurts—just give until it feels good.Your contribution will help us expand our resources and do a far more extensive job of protecting our vulnerable waters.Your donation is tax deductible.Your generosity to the Boyle County Library Fund will ensure not only that we can preserve existing books, manuscripts, and archives, but also that we can continue to supplement the rising acquisitions budget for new books and periodicals.Your generosity will be recognized inThe Anchor,the monthly organization newsletter.Your telephone calls, letters, and checks have made all the difference.204 / HOW TO SAY IT®PARAGRAPHSMany alumni and friends have “shared the wealth” of their Jarrett education by contributing to the tuition aid fund. Some of these tax-deductible gifts have been given directly to the development office, while others have been donated in memory of a loved one. This funding is available for students who are unable to pay all the necessary tuition fees and is a satisfying way of feeling that you have passed on some of what you have received.I’m asking you to do two things. First, write your congressional representatives and senators and tell them you want a change. Second, help us meet the rising costs of lobbying and publicizing this issue with a gift of $10, $25, $50, or more.Please indicate if your gift will matched by your employer. (Your personnel office will provide the necessary information and forms.) Will you be breathing cleaner air next year, or not? It’s up to you. A bill currently before the state legislature (SF1011) will set new, lower levels of tolerable pollution for rural and urban areas. To convince lawmakers of the importance of this bill, I need you to sign the enclosed petition and return it to me at once. Time is running out—the bill comes out of committee later this month. A successful petition drive requires your signed petition…and your dollars. Along with your signed petition, I’m asking you to return a contribution of $25 or $50 to support lobbying efforts for this important measure. But please hurry!Because the School Enrichment Council is organized for the purpose of lobbying and influencing legislation, your gift or donation is not deductible under current IRA guidelines as a charitable contribution. It may, however, be deductible as a business expense. If you have questions, please contact the SEC or your tax accountant.The challenges we face this year are substantially greater than those of the past. We need your support, and you need the benefits of our important work.Please try to send at least $15. Our only source of support is the volun-tary dollars of those like yourself who are concerned about our vanishing wildflowers.A sizable percentage of Clara Hibbert’s campaign funding consists of small individual contributions from people like you who live in the Fifth Ward. She is not the candidate of special interests. She is the candidate of the people who live and do business in your ward.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Mrs. Farrinder:The Board of Directors of the James Area Community Councils recognizes your invaluable help to the J.A.C.C. in various capacities over theHOW TO SAY IT® / 205years. We also note with great interest your successful fundraising efforts last year on behalf of the public library system.We are asking for your support for the J.A.C.C. in a special way this year: Would you consider chairing the 2004 fundraising campaign?This is of course a major commitment and you may have questions about it. Last year’s chair, several members of the committee, and the Board of Directors will be happy to meet with you at your convenience to discuss what this position might involve.We think you would be an effective and inspiring campaign chair, and we hope very much that you will say “yes.”Sincerely,Dear Monty Brewster:On behalf of the Board of Directors of the McCutcheon Foundation and all those who benefit directly and indirectly from its work, I thank you for your most generous contribution. I think I can safely say we have not seen its like in all the years we have been asking individuals to help us with this important work.Hundreds of people’s lives will be materially and positively affected by the kindness and charity we have witnessed today.Thank you, and may you reap one hundredfold the goodness that you sow.Sincerely,Dear Mr. and Mrs. Claggart:You may wonder if people with severe disabilities really can live independently. Isn’t it easier for a disabled person to be taken care of rather than to struggle with the day-to-day decisions about how and where to live? Isn’t institutional living cheaper for the taxpayer? The answer is a resounding NO to both questions!Consider Eva, a thirty-three-year-old woman with developmental disabilities who has lived with her parents all her life. She came to the Denver Center for Independent Living last March and asked for assistance so she could live in an apartment in the community. Shewantedto be independent. And her parents were concerned about what would happen to Eva when they could no longer care for her.DCIL staff went to Eva’s home, evaluated her situation, and helped her decide exactly what special help she needed to live independently.One-on-one training in laundry, cooking, cleaning, money management, and job interviewing skills was provided. Additionally, Eva participated in our recreation program and found a great buddy to do things with.Today Eva has a job washing dishes, her own checking account, a best friend, and a roommate with whom she will be sharing an apartment as soon as she has saved up her share of the rent deposit. Her family is206 / HOW TO SAY IT®delighted with the self-confidence and independence Eva has developed through her work with DCIL.DCIL provides training and support services to any person with a physical, emotional, or developmental disability who wants to live in the community or who is in danger of being placed in an institution. A recent study by the Colorado Department of Social Services shows a 40%savings to the taxpayer when severely disabled people live independently in the community. DCIL services help make that independence possible.With your help, many more people like Eva can live productive lives.Please consider a tax-deductible end-of-year gift to DCIL to continue this important work. Your contribution directly enables persons with disabilities to become independent, contributing members of our community.Thank you for your generosity, and happy holidays!Sincerely,See also: ACCEPTANCES, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, COVER LETTERS, FOLLOW-UP, GOODWILL, INVITATIONS, REFUSALS, REQUESTS, RESPONSES, THANK YOU.