26“Get Well” LettersI work for myself, which is fun. Except for when I call in sick. I know I’m lying.—RITA RUDNERMost of us rely on “get well” cards, but if you’ve ever received a card with nothing but a signature below the commercial message, you know how disappointing it is. You’re grateful for the kindness, but you would have loved a personal, handwritten message.Some “get well” messages are easy to send—the illness isn’t serious or we know the person only casually and aren’t too involved emotionally.At other times, however, our feelings of helplessness, anxiety, and even pity either keep us from writing altogether or produce letters we feel are awkward.The main purpose of “get well” letters is to remind people that they are not alone in their trouble, to offer them the undoubted power of love and friendship as a force for healing. Your “encouraging word” does not have to be lengthy, literary, or memorable; a few warmhearted sentences will do.Send “Get Well” Letters to• business customers, clients, and colleagues who are ill or who have an illness or accident in the family• family members, friends, co-workers, neighbors, or acquaintances who are ill, hospitalized, recovering from an accident, undergoing tests, or having surgery• friends or relatives in chemical dependency treatment or in treatment for depression, eating disorders, or other conditionsHow to Say It• State simply that you are sorry about (or sorry to hear or learn about) the illness, accident, surgery, hospitalization.• Express concern for the person’s well-being (“I want you to be comfortable and on the mend”).• Be pleasant, positive, optimistic.207208 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Offer to help in a specific way: to make the person’s most critical sales calls the next week, finish a project, sit in on a meeting, bring in library books, take children for the weekend or chauffeur them to school events, make calls canceling a social event, provide meals for the family, bring mail to the hospital and help answer it, read aloud to the person, run errands. A vague “Let me know if there’s anything I can do” isn’t helpful. Someone who is ill often can’t even think how you can help or muster the energy to call you. Check with a family member or neighbor to see what needs doing. “People seldom refuse help, if one offers it in the right way.” (A.C. Benson)• In some cases, offer to visit if the person is laid up for a long time or if you think they would welcome company. Generally it’s better not to visit those who are hospitalized or seriously ill at home. The point of a “get well” message is to stand in for you when someone isn’t well enough to see you. Make it easy for the person to refuse your visit in case they aren’t feeling up to it.• Assure the person of your affection, concern, warm thoughts, best wishes, love, or prayers.• End with your hopes for less discomfort, speedy recovery, rapid improvement, better health, a brighter tomorrow.What Not to Say• Avoid being unnecessarily and tactlessly specific about the illness or accident. Say “your car accident” instead of “that horrible accident that took two lives,” or “your surgery” instead of “your ileostomy.”• Avoid such words as “victim,” “handicapped,” and “bedridden”with their unnecessary overtones of tragedy, helplessness, and self-pity. Also avoid dramatic words such as “affliction,” “torture,”“nightmare,” or “agony” unless the situation truly calls for them.Take your cue from the patient and do not jump to conclusions as to how they might perceive their situation. Be sympathetic without overstating the facts or dramatizing your own reaction to them.• Don’t resort to empty phrases, clichés, and false cheeriness like “It’s probably for the best” (it doesn’t feel “best” to the patient); “I know how you feel” (no, you don’t); “God only gives burdens to those who can carry them” (this is arguable); “Every cloud has a silver lining”(not when the cloud is hovering overyourbed); “At least you don’t have to go to work” (the person might prefer the office to the sickbed);“You’ll be up and around again in no time” (the patient is sure of no such thing, and the time passed in bed does not feel like “no time”).Re-read your letter to see how you, in the same situation, would feel about it.• Don’t criticize or question the patient’s care or medical choices unless there is a good reason for doing so. Most people already have doubtsHOW TO SAY IT® / 209about whether they are being cared for as effectively as possible; it’s upsetting when friends add to these doubts.• Don’t compare the person’s situation, illness, or surgery to anyone else’s. Even if you have gone through something almost identical, wait until the person is fully convalescent and distanced from the present discomfort and danger to bring it up. Each person’s experience is unique and generates its distinctive woes.Tips on Writing• Write as soon as you hear the news. Although “get well” letters are welcome at any time, prompt ones carry a stronger message.• Focus more on the other person’s situation than on your own feelings of inadequacy. If you feel helpless and upset, say so, but don’t dwell on it. The situation is more about the patient’s feelings than about yours.• Address the person in the same manner you did before the illness.Jean Kerr once wrote, “One of the most difficult things to contend with in a hospital is the assumption on the part of the staff that because you have lost your gall bladder you have also lost your mind.” It is wounding when friends and family treat the patient as someone who is not quite what she or he used to be. The recipient of your letter is still a person, with all the usual human hopes, interests, relationships, and emotions.• Be brief if the person is seriously ill; later you can send a longer note or letter. Your note shouldn’t be a chore to read; someone just out of surgery may not be up to deciphering illegible handwriting.The person convalescing at home, however, usually welcomes a long, newsy letter. Consider enclosing a few amusing or intriguing clippings from the paper (“What do you think about THIS?!”), photographs, a pressed flower, a cartoon, a sachet of potpourri, a quotation, a child’s drawing, or colorful postcards or pictures. Enclosures are also a good idea when the usual words don’t come easily—in the case of the terminally ill, for example.Special Situations• Reassure hospitalized or ill employees that their jobs are secure and that their work is taken care of. If appropriate, reassure them about sick-leave policy and medical benefits. People often don’t read the small print until they are too sick to do anything but worry about it. The person’s immediate supervisor or someone from the human resources office can send information about insurance, sick leave, and company policies. If you know the person well, your simple assurance210 / HOW TO SAY IT®that there is nothing to worry about may be sufficient. “Get well”messages from managers or executives—even when the employee is not personally known to them—inspire loyalty and are a good idea on both the personal and business levels.• When writing to a sick child, say you’re sorry to hear about the sickness and enclose something colorful, entertaining, and age-appropriate: a word puzzle, riddles, a cartoon or clipping from the paper, a story you made up or found in a magazine, a sticker book. Hand-letter a “coupon” good for a stack of library books that you will bring over and pick up several weeks later, a carry-in meal from a favorite fast food place (if parents approve), thirty minutes of being read to, chauffeuring of friends to and from the patient’s house or the hospital.If you think the child will write back, help them along by asking a few questions: What’s the hospital room like? Who is the doctor? What is the best thing about being sick? The worst thing? What is your day like, from morning to night? What is the first thing you’re going to do when you get well?• rsquo; Don’t send a get-well message to someone who isn’t going to get well. And don’t write to say how sad you are. Instead, send your love along with an upbeat note (“I’m glad you’re resting comfortably now” or “It sounds as if you’re getting excellent care” or “I see your grandson’s math team is going to the finals”). Don’t mention death until the other person brings it up. Some people do not want to discuss it; others do. Follow their lead. Reread your letter to see that you have not subconsciously written a “sympathy” card to the person about their anticipated death. An appropriate letter says you are thinking about your friend and (if this is true) that you are praying for them. Include a shared memory, but avoid telling it as an epitaph (“I will never forget…” “I will always remember you as the one who…”). You might say instead, “I’m still thinking about your giant pumpkin. I’ll bet it would have won first prize at the State Fair.” Focus on those pleasures that are still possible for the terminally ill patient, for example, letterwriting, visits with family and friends, reading, old movies, card games, dictating memoirs.• Those who are living with AIDS are your friends, neighbors, and relatives first, and only second are people with a usually terminal illness. Write as you would to anyone with a serious illness, and don’t assume the person’s time is short; medical advances are adding years of high-quality life for some people with AIDS. Being supportive and sending a card is more important than saying exactly the right thing.Focus on the person, rather than on the illness. You might also suggest a visit. Because of the false perception of the nature of AIDS, some people distance themselves from friends living with it, adding another hardship to the illness.• When writing those in treatment for chemical dependency, eating disorders, and other such diseases, choose commercial cards that sayHOW TO SAY IT® / 211“thinking of you” rather than “get well.” Add a handwritten note that says in your own words “I care about you” or “You are important to me.”• When a friend or relative is injured or ill enough to need constant care, write not only to the patient but to the person responsible for their care—spouse, parent, child, relative—and offer your emotional support as well as some practical help (running errands, chauffeuring, bringing meals, spending time with the patient so the caregiver has some free time).Format• Commercial cards are appropriate for many different “get well”situations and their use is almost standard today. Some recipients skip the printed verse to read your handwritten message, but others read every word of the commercial message as though you had written it for them; for this reason, select your card with care. Always write something personal on the card—either a brief message at the bottom of the inside right-hand page or a longer message on the (usually blank) inside left-hand page.• Use personal stationery, notepaper, or engraved note cards for handwritten notes.• For business contacts or close friends, a typed message on business letterhead, personal-business stationery, or memo paper is as welcome as a handwritten note.WORDSaccidentaffectioncheercomfortconcernedconvalescencediagnosisdiscomfortdishearteningdisorderdistressedhealhealthhopeillnessoptimisticpainfulrecoveryrelapsesaddenedsicknesssorrysupportsympathytreatmentuncomfortableundergounfortunateunwelcomePHRASESbe up and aboutbright prospects212 / HOW TO SAY IT®clean bill of healthdevoutly hopeearly recoveryencouraging newsfelt so bad to hearfervent/fond hopegood prospectsgreatly affected by the news thathave every/great confidence thatquick return to healthrapid/speedy recoveryregain your healthrestore/return to healthsorry/very sorry/mighty sorry tohearthinking of youunhappy to hear aboutwishing you happier, healthier daysaheadSENTENCESAlthough we’ll miss you, don’t worry about your work—we’re parceling it out among us for the time being.Best wishes for speedy recovery.Don’t worry about the office—we’ll manage somehow.Fawnia says you’re doctoring that annoying shoulder again.From what I understand, this treatment will make all the difference/will give you a new lease on life.Hearing about your diagnosis was a shock, but we’re hoping for better news down the road.Here’s hoping you feel a little better every day.I am concerned about you.I hope you’ll soon be well/back to your old self/up and around/up and about/back in the swing of things/back on your feet.I hope you’re not feeling too dejected by this latest setback.I’m glad to hear you’re getting some relief from the pain.I’m sorry you’ve had such a scare, but relieved to know you caught it in time.It’s no fun being laid up.I was so sorry to hear about your illness/that you were in the hospital.Knowing your unusual determination and energy, we are anticipating a speedy recovery.The news of your emergency surgery came as quite a shock.The office/this place is not the same without you!We expect to see you as good as new in a few weeks.HOW TO SAY IT® / 213We’re all rooting for you to get better quickly.We’re hoping for the best of everything for you.We’re thinking of you and hoping you’ll feel better soon.What a bitter pill to come through the heart surgery with flying colors and then to break your hip!You’re very much on my mind and in my heart these days.PARAGRAPHSI’d love to hear from you when you feel up to writing. Until then, be patient with yourself and don’t try to do too much too soon. I’m thinking about you every day.We’re relieved you came out of the accident so lightly—although from your point of view, it may not feel all that good at the moment. I hope you’re not too uncomfortable.I was sorry to hear about your arthritis. I hope you don’t mind, but I made a contribution in your name to the Arthritis Foundation and asked them to send you informational brochures.Can I help with anything while you’re out of commission? Because of my work schedule and the family’s activities, I’m not as free as I’d like to be. However, some things I would be delighted to do are: pick up groceries for you on my way home from work (about 5:30), run the children to evening school events, have them over on Saturday or Sunday afternoons, make phone calls for you, run errands on Saturday mornings, bring over a hot dish once a week. I’d really like to help. You’d do the same for me if our positions were reversed. I’ll be waiting for your call.I’m sending you some oldHighlights for Childrenmagazines and one new scrapbook. I thought you could cut out your favorite pictures and stories and paste them in the scrapbook. It might help pass the time while you have to stay in bed.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Harry,What a shock to get to work this morning and have Louie tell me that the only reason I punched in earlier than you for once was that you’d been in an accident. It was pretty gloomy around here until we got some information from the hospital. Your doctor evidently thinks the general picture looks good and you shouldn’t be laid up too long.Louie has divided up your work between Max and Charlie so don’t worry about anything at this end.Best wishes,214 / HOW TO SAY IT®Dear Mrs. Gummidge,We were sorry to learn that you have been hospitalized. I took the liberty of stopping your newspaper and mail delivery for the time being (the mail is being held at the post office). Since I had a copy of your house key, I went in to make sure the faucets were off and the windows shut (except for leaving one upstairs and one downstairs open an inch for air). I’ve been going in at night and turning on a few lights so it doesn’t look empty.I wasn’t sure you were up to a phone call, but I thought you’d want to know that the house is being looked after.We’re praying for your speedy recovery.With best wishes,Dear Ms. Melbury,The staff and management at The Woodlanders join me in wishing you a speedy recovery from your emergency surgery. We are relieved to hear that the surgery went well and that you’ll be back among us before long. For one thing, you are the only one who can ever find the Damson files.Don’t even think about work. Giles Winterborne is taking over the outstanding projects on your desk, and Felice Charmond is answering your phone and handling things as they come up. Marty South will send you a copy of company policy on sick leave and hospitalization costs (both are generous, I think).Sincerely yours,Dear Jay,I hear you’ve been under the weather lately. As soon as you feel up to it, let me know and I’ll call Daisy and Tom and Nick—there’s nothing like a party for lifting the old spirits.Best,Dear Eliza,Grandma and I were so sorry to hear that you’ve got the chicken socks.We didn’t know chickens wore socks, so we were surprised. What’s that?You say you have the chicken fox. What kind of an animal is a chicken fox anyway? What’s that? You say you have a chicken box. Are you going to raise chickens in it? Oh, excuse me, you have the chicken rocks. We’ve never heard of them. Are they the latest fad, like pet rocks? Oho! We’ve got it now. You’ve got the CHICKEN POX. Maybe by the time you’ve read this long letter, you will be feeling a little better.Grandma said to tell you to be sure not to scratch, but I’m sure you won’t.HOW TO SAY IT® / 215In a few days when you feel better we’ll give you a call and you can tell us yourself how you’re feeling.Love,Dear Olivia,You realize, of course, that there will be no further bridge games until you are well! None of us is willing to invite a substitute—“Replace Olivia?As Sam Goldwyn put it in two words: Im Possible.”Don’t worry about the homefront. George has things under control, and we are all taking turns entertaining your house guest, that nice Mr.Pim.Give us the high sign when you are ready for phone calls or visits—or a game of bridge!Love,Dear Goldie,I was sorry to hear about Abraham’s accident yesterday. Your daughter seemed to think that although he was facing some surgery and was fairly uncomfortable, the outlook was good. I hope all goes well and that he can look forward to coming home soon.You have taken no compassionate leave in the eight years you have been with us, so there is no problem with your taking as long as you like to be with Abraham. Patsy Tate assumed responsibility for your station; she may call you from time to time with a question, but otherwise the situation is well in hand.Although our hospitalization insurance is based on a pre-admit system, this doesn’t apply in the case of an emergency, such as Abraham’s hospitalization. However, there are a few steps you should take in the next several days to regularize the situation. I’ve asked someone from Human Resources to call you about this.If there is anything we can do to make things easier for you, let us know. In the meantime, you are very much in our thoughts.Sincerely,See also: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, BELATED, FAMILY, SENSITIVE, SYMPATHY, THANK YOU.