27Goodwill LettersIt is not enough to collect today’s profits, for your competitoris collecting tomorrow’s good will.—THE SYSTEM COMPANY,HOW TO WRITE LETTERS THAT WIN, 1906Goodwill letters are sales letter, but you aren’t selling a product or service directly. You “sell” the recipient on your company’s worth, reputation, friendliness, integrity, and competence. You want the reader to think well of your company and to keep you in mind for future purchases and services.Although sales are generally based on price, color, dimensions, length of service contract, and other measurable properties, many other sales are based on feelings or attitudes. Goodwill letters appeal to the nonma-terial aspects of customer choice.Kinds of Goodwill Letters• anniversaries: service/wedding• announcements: change in prices/personnel/policies/address (see also ANNOUNCEMENTS)• appreciation: good payment record/past business/customer referral (see also APPRECIATION)• congratulations (see CONGRATULATIONS)• customers’ and employees’ life events (see appropriate topic)• holiday greetings (see HOLIDAYS)• special events and offers: open houses/sales/discounts/gifts/samples/ certificates/coupons• surveys/questionnaires• thank you: previous business/current purchase/suggestions/ assistance/good work (see also THANK YOU)• welcome/welcome back (see also WELCOME)How to Say It• Open with a friendly or complimentary remark.• State your main message (congratulations, thank you, keeping in touch, happy holidays, “just want to see how you’re doing”). Almost 216HOW TO SAY IT® / 217any occasion is reason enough to show interest in your customers or employees.• Expand on the message (“I’m particularly grateful because…” or“You’ve been a delight to work with because…” or “I hope the New Year is a happy and healthy one for you and your family”).• When possible, focus on the other person’s situation, interests, concerns; this is a “you” letter.• Close with pleasant wishes for success and a mention of future or continued contact.What Not to Say• Don’t include a strong sales message in a goodwill letter. Mention your products or services only lightly or not at all.• Don’t dilute the impact of a goodwill letter by asking for business, or for a favor, or for higher work outputs, or by including business news or comments. Save them for another letter.• Don’t be too effusive. Use a natural, informal tone that conveys a genuine friendliness.Tips on Writing• Send goodwill letters within your organization. Although it is never mandatory to congratulate an employee on a service anniversary, for example, you encourage good morale and company loyalty by doing so. Holidays are an excellent occasion for goodwill letters written to employees on behalf of company management, firm officers, or board of directors.• Take advantage of routine announcements (new type of billing statement, new address, meeting notice) to develop a goodwill letter (thanking customers for their business or employees for a good year).• The end-of-the-year holiday season is an excellent time to send a goodwill letter, but mail it early so that it doesn’t get lost in the other December mail and so that customers haven’t already spent their gift budget elsewhere.Special Situations• A survey or questionnaire about the customer’s use of your products or services is helpful to you; it also serves as a goodwill letter as most people like being asked for an opinion and thanked for their help. To ensure that it is a pleasure instead of a burden, the survey must be brief, easy to complete, and returnable with a postage-paid envelope.218 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Goodwill gifts—samples, trial sizes, the first in a series, something the customer can keep whether they purchase anything or not—are accompanied by a cover letter. The sales message is not too strong as the free product is theoretically the message. However, follow up this mailing with a letter a few weeks later. At that time you can intensify the sales message. (See also COVER LETTERS, SALES.)Format• All goodwill letters are typed on letterhead stationery, except for brief congratulatory notes to employees and colleagues that may be typed, or possibly handwritten, on memo paper.• When sending holiday greetings to employees, or customers, or other general-message letters, a well-written form letter is customary and acceptable.WORDSappreciatedelightedenjoyedgratefulinspiredkindnessmemorablepleasedremarkablesatisfyingsensationalspecialsuperbterrificthoughtfuluniquevaluablePHRASEShappy/pleased to hearhow are you getting along withjust thinking about youjust to let you knowkeep us in mindlet us know iflike to keep in touch withlook forward to your nextpleased to be able toshow our gratitude forwanted you to knowwishing you all the bestwould be glad to have you stop inagain whenSENTENCESAll of us here at Larolle International send you warmest holiday greetings and our best wishes for a happy, healthy new year!HOW TO SAY IT® / 219As one of our longtime customers, you may be interested in our new, faster ordering procedures.Because we appreciate the responsible handling of your account, we are raising your credit limit to $15,000.Congratulations on your ten years with us—you’re a key player on our (thanks to you!) successful team.Enclosed is an article on retirement savings that we thought you’d like to see.I heard something pretty special is going on over there!Sawbridge Training Services, Inc. now has a special customer hotline—at no charge to the calling party—for all your questions and concerns.The Pig and Whistle invites you to a customer appreciation sale, but bring this card with you as the sale is “invitation only.”PARAGRAPHSYou used to order regularly from us, but we haven’t heard from you for some time now. To help you remember how easy it was to order and how much you enjoyed our high-quality camping merchandise, we’re enclosing a “welcome back” certificate good for 15% off your next order.We hope you use it—we’ve missed you!I noticed the handsome photograph of you and your husband in Sunday’s paper—congratulations on twenty-five years of marriage! Do stop by the office the next time you’re in the store so I can congratulate you personally.Thank you so much for referring Stanley Purves to us. It is because of generous and appreciative customers like you that Dorset Homes has been growing by leaps and bounds. We will give Mr. Purves our best service—and we are always ready to help you in any way we can. Thanks again for passing on the word!You are cordially invited to an Open House on January 29 from 5:00to 8:00 p.m. to celebrate our fiftieth anniversary. We are taking this opportunity to show our appreciation to our many fine customers. Do come—we will have a small gift waiting for you!SAMPLE LETTERSDear Jules,I see that the bank is celebrating an important birthday—congratulations! You must be proud to see what a success Mignaud et Fils has become one hundred years after its founding by your great-grandfather.All of us here at Philips Deluxe Checks wish you continued success and prosperity.220 / HOW TO SAY IT®Sincerely,Dear Mr. and Mrs. Charles:It has been three months since your new floor tiles were installed. I hope you’ve been enjoying them. We have customers who still rave about floor tile they bought from us thirty years ago.If we can be of service to you in the future, keep us in mind. We’re planning a storewide three-day sale on all floor coverings in late January in case you’re interested in doing any other rooms.Thanks again for choosing a fine floor product from Geiger Tiles.Yours truly,Dear Joanna Pryke,We are delighted to note that Warner Maintenance Experts have been cleaning your office carpets four times a year for six years now. As a business executive yourself, you know the value of faithful, longtime customers.To show our appreciation, we’d like to pass on to you a sample of an effective carpet spot cleaner that we recently discovered. Note that we are not selling this product nor do we make any recommendation for it other than that we ourselves like it. When we had a chance to buy some samples, we thought of our favorite customers and decided to share them.Enjoy the spot cleaner, and I hope you continue to look forward to our thorough, deep-cleaning process that leaves your carpeting like new!Dear Hilda Cherrington:Over the years, you have ordered a number of our fine products.You’re one of the reasons that Lee Gifts is the premier mail order house that it is.To thank you for your business and to introduce you to a completely new line of Christmas ornaments, we are enclosing the “Christmas Star”for your enjoyment. We think we you will admire the fine craftwork that went into this delicate ornament. It makes a wonderful keepsake gift for friends and relatives. Also enclosed is a copy of our current catalog, which shows all twenty-five of the new “Memories” series of ornaments.We hope you enjoy your ornament!Sincerely,See also: ANNIVERSARIES, APPRECIATION, CONGRATULATIONS,“GET WELL,” HOLIDAYS, NEIGHBORS, SYMPATHY, THANK YOU, WELCOME.