28Holiday LettersA holiday gives one a chance to look backward and forward,to reset oneself by an inner compass.—MAY SARTONWith the proliferation of commercial greeting cards and holiday-oriented retail sales events (Memorial Day Sale! July Fourth Sale! Presidents’ Day Sale! Labor Day Sale!), we are now conscious not only of such traditional holidays as New Year’s or Thanksgiving, but also of dozens of others.Businesses wanting to send goodwill letters to customers, colleagues, and employees can choose any holiday as a reason for writing. Family and friends generally send holiday greetings and newsy letters no more than once or twice a year, most often around the end of the old year or the beginning of the new one. Fundraisers know that people are more willing to give during the holidays and therefore schedule some of their most important appeals in late fall. It is not surprising that first-class canceled mail peaks substantially in December.The United States Postal Service likes us to “mail early” to equalize the flow of holiday mail and reduce the expense of overtime hours for carriers. When not enough of us mail early, a metropolitan post office that ordinarily cancels eight or nine hundred thousand first-class letters per day will handle nearly three million per day just before December 25 (most of it scheduled for local next-day service).Of all personal mail, 43 percent is accounted for by holiday cards (other greeting cards make up 21 percent and letters the remaining 36percent).Holiday Letters Include• Christmas• Columbus Day• Easter• Election Day• Father’s Day• form/annual letters• goodwill letters• Halloween• Hanukkah• Independence Day• Labor Day• Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Birthday221222 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Memorial Day• Mother’s Day• New Year’s• Pesach• Purim• Rosh Hashana• St. Patrick’s Day• Thanksgiving• Valentine’s Day• Veterans Day• Yom KippurHow to Say It• Begin with an expression of the appropriate holiday greeting.• Inquire about the other person and relate your own news if it is a personal letter. For a business letter, express appreciation for the other person and the hopes of being of service in the future.• Wish the person happiness, success, health, prosperity.What Not to Say• Don’t let a greeting card do all your speaking for you. If you have nothing to say to the person beyond the sentiments of a mass-produced card followed by a preprinted or signed name, your gesture may be meaningless; most people are disappointed to open a card and find no personal message.• When sending a goodwill letter to employees, don’t use it to “get a point across,” to chide the group, or to transmit office news.• Don’t send an aggressive sales message in a holiday letter (which is essentially a goodwill letter). An exception is a logical connection such as florists and Mother’s Day or candy and Valentine’s Day.Tips on Writing• Not every household is a happy one. Among your friends, co-workers, and customers are people who have lost loved ones, who have financial worries, illnesses, or other burdens. Except for mass-produced business holiday letters, of which no one expects great sensitivity, choose seasonal greetings that are low-key and can convey your good wishes without an insistent and perhaps offensive cheeriness.• Because some holidays are also holy days, businesses try to respect customers’ beliefs. This means avoiding religious cards and sentiments unless your audience is well known to you. Do not casually bring religious elements into your goodwill letters; it may be perceived as hypocritical and self-serving. Consult with adherents of different faiths to see how your message appears to them. Since the majority of holidayHOW TO SAY IT® / 223letters are mailed in December, a reference to the New Year is appropriate. Mention the year (“to wish you success and happiness in 2003”) to avoid confusion with religious year beginnings. Otherwise, use terms such as “the holidays,” “this season,” “at this time of year.”• When sending holiday letters to family and friends, you can piggyback other news onto your greetings: the announcement of a new address, an engagement, a baby, or a new job. In the case of a divorce, for example, it is convenient to append the news to year’send letters. Be sure to mail your greeting early to save friends the minor embarrassment of sending their greetings to you as a couple.• When one member of the household writes the messages and signs the greeting cards for all, it doesn’t matter if they put their name first or last.Special Situations• Send holiday greetings to employees on behalf of company management, firm officers, or board of directors to generate goodwill and company identification. Wish the employees personal and professional happiness, offer congratulations for the good year just past, and express appreciation for the employees’ contributions.• The most common customer goodwill letter is probably the year-end greeting. If your message is a general calling-to-mind letter or card (insurance agent, publisher, bank), send it anytime. But if December is an important sales or fundraising month for your organization, mail your greeting early in the month or even in November, before people shop or spend their donation dollars.• Some people (and letterwriting authorities) find holiday form letters unacceptable, while others (including yet other letterwriting authorities) enjoy writing and receiving them. Whatever one thinks of them, they are unlikely to disappear. After years of printing letters pro and con, Ann Landers polled her readers and then wrote, “The verdict is clear—100 to 1” in favor of the holiday newsletters. They are practical for those who must either send a form letter or not write at all. People used to live and die in the same town; their pool of friends and acquaintances was small and didn’t require written communications. Today’s family might have hundreds of names in its address file. Form letters don’t have to be boring, and many aren’t. In the polycopied part of your letter, tell your general news: the year’s highlights, changes in your lives, travels, work and school happenings.You can organize your letter chronologically or by topic or by giving each family member a paragraph. A letter is more interesting if you discuss ideas as well as activities: your concerns about the environment, a good book you recommend, a lecture you attended, the state of television today, your political views. You can also include anec-224 / HOW TO SAY IT®dotes, quotations, photocopied clippings of interest, or snapshots. Be specific. Instead of saying something was “wonderful” or “beautiful,”give details. In the handwritten part of your letter (which is a “must,”even if it’s only a line or two), address the interests of that particular person, commenting on their last letter, asking about their life. If you receive a number of photocopied letters in your year’s-end mail, you are probably safe sending one yourself. If none of your correspondents use this form, it’s possible that you are marching to a different drum-mer—which may also be why they like you.Format• The tremendously popular greeting card is always acceptable, but add a handwritten message to it. If your name is printed or engraved on the card, add a personal note. Don’t use social titles when having your name printed. For example, “Eddie Swanson,” “Goldie Rind-skopf,” “Bill and Sarah Ridden” (not “Mr. and Mrs. William Ridden”) or simply “Bill and Sarah.” Children’s first names are usually listed on the second line. In the case of a single parent with a different name (“Grace Larkins”), the children’s last name is given (“Annie, Miriam, and Minnie Wells”).• Business letters conveying seasonal greetings are generally typed, although some companies send greeting cards, postcards, or specially printed letters with colorful graphics. A letter can be made more personal than a greeting card and can carry more information. Investigate the cost differences between greeting cards and letters. The latter are generally less expensive even if you use special effects, decorations, and a colored envelope. Keep an idea file of some of the clever seasonal creations other businesses have used over the years. Eye-catching letters are not, of course, appropriate for all purposes; banks, legal firms, insurance companies, and others are not helped by overly “creative”letters.• E-mail has a limited use in letting people know we wish them well on a holiday. Use it for people with whom you correspond almost entirely by e-mail.WORDSblessingscelebrationgratitudehappinesshealthprosperityserenityjoypeacepleasurerejoiceremembrancesseasonsuccesswishesHOW TO SAY IT® / 225PHRASESall the best of the seasonat this time of yearcompliments of the seasonduring this season and alwaysgreat/happy/festive time of yearhappy memorieshave appreciated your patronageholiday greetingsover the past yearin commemoration/celebration ofmagic of the holiday seasonmuch to look forward toseason’s blessings/greetingssincere wishes forthis festive seasonwarmest regards/wishes to youwishes for a joyous seasonwishing you lovewith warm personal regardswonderful holiday seasonSENTENCESAs we at the Bennett Company look back over 2001, we remember with appreciation our friendly, faithful customers.Best wishes for a bright and beautiful season/for a New Year of happiness.Everyone here at Taunton-Dawbeney sends you best wishes for happiness, health, and prosperity throughout the coming New Year.“Here’s to your good health, and your family’s good health, and may you all live long and prosper.” (Washington Irving) Holiday greetings and best wishes for the New Year.I hope that 2002 was a good year for you and that 2003 will be even better.I hope the New Year brings you health, happiness, and small daily joys!May the beauty and joys of this season stay with you throughout the year.May you be inscribed and sealed for a happy, healthy, and prosperous year.May your shadow never be less!On Rosh Hashanah it is written…On Yom Kipper it is sealed.Our best wishes to you for a Merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year.Skip this part if you are allergic to form letters, if you don’t care what we’ve been doing, or if you can’t remember who we are.The best part of this beautiful season is keeping in touch with special friends like you.This is just a note to say we’re thinking of you at Thanksgiving/Hanukkah/Christmas/Passover/Easter.226 / HOW TO SAY IT®This time of year inspires us to count our blessings—and good customers like you are chief among them!Though we can’t be with you at the Thanksgiving table, our hearts are there.Warm wishes to you and your dear ones this holiday season.We’re remembering you at Passover and wishing you happiness always!We send our warmest wishes for health and happiness—and to borrow my Irish grandfather’s blessing: “I hope we’re all here this day twelve-month.”We wish for you the gifts of love, friendship, and good health.We wish you all the best in the coming year.PARAGRAPHSThey don’t call them Easter “bonnets” anymore, but the idea is the same! Come in and see our chic selection of spring hats: delicate straws from Italy, smart little toques from France, wacky and colorful sun-skimmers from Haiti, elegant felts from England, and much more! Buy a hat before Easter and receive a free stuffed bunny (wearing the latest in bunny bonnets) for the special child in your life.Eileen spent a month in Germany this summer, surviving a no-show on her luggage, a tick bite that required serum treatment, and a bomb threat on her return flight. As for me, I’ve been working with a local group to promote a recycling program here—we can talk trash, even in front of the children. Now you’re thinking, “Great! I didn’t have to hear about their latest remodeling project.” Sorry. This year we turned the pantry into a bathroom, and…To start the New Year off right and to show our appreciation for your patronage last year, I’m enclosing a certificate good for one free meal with the purchase of another of equal or greater price.Mother’s Day is coming soon, and Rowley Floral Shops (with twenty-three metro-area locations) are offering a Mother’s Day special you’ll want to consider. Choose from one of six stunning floral arrangements (and six surprisingly low prices) to tell that very important person in your life how much she means to you. Included in your one low price is delivery anywhere in the metro area and a special Mother’s Day card with Anne Taylor’s charming verse:Who ran to help me when I fellAnd would some pretty story tell,Or kiss the place to make it well?My Mother.Come in today and see which of the six arrangements will bring a smile to YOUR Mother’s face!HOW TO SAY IT® / 227This Thanksgiving, as you reflect on your blessings, take a minute to consider those who have been overwhelmed by adversity. Help us provide traditional home-cooked Thanksgiving dinners with all the trimmings for the hungry and homeless during this Thanksgiving season.You can feed ten hungry people for $13.90, twenty for $27.80, or one hundred for $139. Won’t you help?SAMPLE LETTERSTO: All Norton employeesFROM: Marda Norton, PresidentRE: Martin Luther King, Jr. DayBeginning this year, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day will be a paid holiday for all employees. This day has particular significance for us as I believe Norton represents in many ways the lived-out reality of the dream for which Martin Luther King, Jr. lived and died.We urge employees to devote at least a part of the day to some community service. Bob Gates in Personnel has a list of suggestions if you are interested.Also, for this, our first holiday, you are invited to a potluck dinner in the upper cafeteria at 6:00 p.m. on January 16. Please call Bob Gates, ext.42, with your reservation, and bring a covered dish. Depending on the interest shown in this year’s potluck, we may continue the tradition.Dear Homeowner,It’s not too late! If you haven’t put in your shrubs and trees and perennials yet, Verrinder Garden Center’s big Memorial Day sale will make you GLAD you didn’t get around to it!Enclosed is a checklist of our complete tree, shrub, perennial, and annual stock (helpfully marked to show sun/shade requirements) so that you can walk around your yard and note what you need. Bring the list with you and you won’t forget a thing! Not only that, but when you check out, show your checklist and you will receive a 10% discount on your entire order!Have a safe and happy Memorial Day weekend!Dear Mr. and Mrs. Burdock,Will you be entertaining family and friends over the Fourth of July weekend?How about inviting just one more to the celebration? Galbraith Catering—a full-service, licensed, insured caterer—can provide you with box lunches, a full multi-course buffet, or anything in between. If you want to make the main course, we’ll bring salads, breads, and desserts. Or vice versa!228 / HOW TO SAY IT®Feel like a guest at your own party! We provide servers, clean-up crew, tables, chairs, linens, dishes, and expert advice and assistance.We are glad to supply references, and as a concerned member of the community, we recycle all papers and plastics, and we donate extra food to the Vane County Food Shelf.For special events, you may want to make an appointment to come taste some of our specialties and choose the ones you think your guests would like. For simpler events, you are only a phone call away from trouble-free hospitality!Happy Fourth of July! And, remember, we can help with everything but the fireworks!Dear Parent,What perfect timing! Just as you’re worrying about getting the children outfitted for the winter months, along comes Columbus Day! The children have a free day, and WE’RE having our lowest-prices-ever children’s outerwear sale!During our big Columbus Day sale (special hours 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.) we’ll have free balloons and cookies for the children…and great prices and selections on over twenty name-brand children’s coats and jackets.Did we say it already? What perfect timing!Dear Mrs. Gorsand,If you’re a kindergartener, Halloween can be scary. If you’re a homeowner, it can also be scary—if you’ve gotten that far into fall without finishing your yard chores!The MORGAN RENTAL BARN has everything you need to prepare for winter: leaf blowers, power rakes, lawn vacs, aerators, trimmers, chippers, shredders, drop spreaders, tillers—even lawnmowers if yours didn’t make it through the season and you don’t want to give a new one house room over the winter!(And if you do finish your chores in time and want to celebrate Halloween with the kids, check out our rental party supplies!) December 2002Greetings Dear Family and Friends,Seasonal salutations to you! We hope this finds you in good health and spirits.The year 2002 has been especially noteworthy for our family. We saw Kalli play the clarinet at Carnegie Hall, Lauren’s soccer team win the World Cup, Leah awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature, and Paul discover the cure for cavities. Not bad for a year’s efforts.HOW TO SAY IT® / 229Wait a minute! Wait a minute! Just testing to see if you were really reading this. Actually, it has been a fine year, mostly filled with all of the usual family business—school, soccer, piano lessons, soccer, gymnastics, soccer, clarinet, soccer, and softball. Favorite activities included skiing, hiking, swimming, camping, golfing, eating in, and eating out.As the wonderful holidays approach, we want to take this opportunity to send you our best wishes. Even though in miles you may be far away, in spirit you’re close to our hearts.All the best to you and yours in 2003!Lots of love,Paul, TerryKalli, Lauren, and LeahSee also: CONGRATULATIONS, FAMILY, FUNDRAISING, GOODWILL, SALES.