29Letters of InstructionMost of us would rather risk catastrophe than read the directions.—MIGNON MCLAUGHLINIndividual letters of instruction have been replaced by form letters, package inserts, owners’ manuals, product brochures, drugstore medication printouts, and other computer-generated or preprinted materials.Such instructions include equipment or appliance operating instructions, safety instructions, assembly instructions, and installation instructions as well as instructions on how to dispute a credit card charge, apply for admission, sign an enclosed contract or lease, return merchandise, obtain a refund or exchange, or order replacement parts. Because commercial instructions deal with matters involving possible injury, loss of money, damage, and of course customer goodwill and repeat sales, they must be precisely crafted. “Read the manufacturer’s directions with care…. This is one of the hardest kinds of prose in the world to write. It must be factual, accurate, and crystal clear.” (Virginia Graham) Businesses occasionally write letters of instructions, generally in response to a customer query. Letters of instruction are also written inside a company, most often as a memo.Written instructions are given to the couple staying with your children while you are out of town, the patient following a specific care regimen, the neighbor child who waters your garden, the day-care provider, the carpenters working on your house.Write Letters of Instructions for• agreements/contracts/leases• babysitters/day-care providers• changes to your will and other legal issues• forms/applications/surveys• house/plant/garden/pet care• new policies/procedures/regulations• operating instructions: appliances/tools/equipment• payments• product registrations/use/care• return, repair, or replacement of merchandise 230HOW TO SAY IT® / 231• samples• shipping instructionsHow to Say It• Thank the person (if you are responding to a letter, phone call, or in-person query) or state the purpose of your letter (“To help you get the most out of your new software, we offer the following suggestions for use”; “These instructions will help you care for your instrument so that it will give optimum performance pleasure”).• Number or otherwise set off each step in the instructions.• If appropriate, give a phone number, contact person and address, or other resource where further help can be obtained.• End with a pleasant statement of appreciation or with a mention of future business or enjoyment of the new product.What Not to Say• “Don’t give instructions in the negative” is a negative statement.“Word your instructions positively” is a positive one. Use the positive form. When you see “don’t,” “never,” and “should not” in your instructions, rephrase the sentence to read positively.• Don’t use words like “simple” and “obvious.” Invariably, these words preface something that is neither simple nor obvious to readers, and they feel rebuked for not understanding something that apparently everyone else does.• Don’t use a condescending tone. For example, sometimes a “broken”appliance is simply not plugged in. The first in a list of troubleshooting instructions generally advises seeing that the appliance is plugged in. State this neutrally so that the customer doesn’t feel too stupid if that’s the problem.Tips on Writing• Be brief. After writing the instructions, pare them down to the essentials. “Explanations grow under our hands, in spite of our effort at compression.” (John Henry Cardinal Newman)• Be specific. If you say “soak contacts overnight,” give the desired number of hours in parentheses. “Overnight” means different things to different people. When advising that an appliance be cleaned regularly, describe products and procedures that work best and tell what“regularly” means. Explain or graphically identify parts, in case readers are not familiar with industry terminology.• Be intelligible. When preparing a form letter that will be used232 / HOW TO SAY IT®thousands of times, ask people outside your department to read it for clarity. Some of the worst instructions have been written by experts; because they know their field so well they cannot understand the mind of the uninitiated well enough to adequately explain anything. In her 1923 book, Mary Owens Crowther counsels, “It is well to remember that motion pictures do not accompany letters and hence to take for granted that if a way exists for getting what you mean wrong that way will be found.”• Be diplomatic. Some requests for instructions may appear inane to you and the answers so obvious you hardly know how to phrase your response. But people’s brains work in wonderfully odd and di-vergent ways, and the person may actually be looking at the situation in a way very different from the way you see it. Then, too, even if it is a “stupid” question, good public relations demands that you treat it as politely and helpfully as any other question.• When possible, explainwhyas well ashow.For example, “Do not use this compound when there is danger of rain followed by temperatures below 32 degrees.” Many people will accept this instruction without question. But others will wonder what rain and cold have to do with anything, and still others will ignore it, thinking it unimportant. If you add, “because the compound will absorb the moisture, freeze, expand, and probably crack,” users are far more likely to follow the instruction—and you will receive fewer complaints. “I can never remember things I didn’t understand in the first place.” (Amy Tan)Special Situations• Cover letters often contain instructions. When sending someone a sample, a contract, or a product, for example, explain how to interpret or use the item.• Any document that must be signed (contract, lease, stock transfer) is accompanied by a letter explaining where signatures or initials are needed, if the signatures need a medallion or notarization, which copy to retain for the person’s files, where to send the other copies.• Assembly, installation, operating, and safety instructions are generally included in an owner’s manual. However, you might accompany the manual with a cover letter emphasizing special cautions (“Please particularly note the section on fire hazards”).Format• Instructions to customers are typed on letterhead stationery.• Memos are used for in-house instructions and are typed except for the briefest and most casual instructions.HOW TO SAY IT® / 233• Form letters are used for routine letters of instructions.WORDSadvicecarefullycautiond e m o n -stratedescriptiondetailse x p l a n a -guidelinestionhow-toillustrateindicatei n f o r m a -tionmethodoperationpolicyprecautionprocedureregulationssimplifystepssystemwarningwarrantyPHRASESalert you toalways check to seeas the illustration showsbefore you use your appliancecommonly used toimportant safety instructionsit requires that youmuch more effective tonote thatonce you are familiar withpoint outrecommend/suggest that youstandard operating procedureyou will find thatSENTENCESCaution: please read the rules for safe operation before plugging in your Villamarti “Thinking Bull” table lamp.Follow the illustrated instructions to trim hair at home quickly and professionally with your Clavering Clippers.I am not sure which model of the Thursley Electric Toothbrush you have, so I’m enclosing instructions for all of them.If you have more questions, call our hotline at 800/555-5379.If you plan to deliver your baby at Malmayne’s Old St. Paul’s Hospital, please note the following instructions for preadmittance.Please note the following guidelines.We are happy to be able to clarify this matter for you.234 / HOW TO SAY IT®You don’t need special tools to install this fixture, but follow the steps in the order given.Your Aldridge electric knife will provide you with a lifetime of use if you follow these care instructions.PARAGRAPHSEnclosed is the final version of the contract, which constitutes the complete and entire agreement between us. Please read it carefully and consult with your attorney before signing all three copies on the bottom of page 5. Please also initial clauses Cl and D3 to indicate your awareness of the changes we have agreed upon. Return all three copies to me along with a check covering the agreed-upon amount. One copy of the contract will be countersigned and returned to you.Thanks for taking care of the hamsters while we’re away. If you can stop by once a day, that’d be great. Give everybody one-quarter cup of hamster food. Fill their water bottles. Give Furball an apple slice and Marigold a banana slice from the fruit in the plastic box (they don’t care if it’s old and brown). The others don’t need any special treats. We’ll be back before the cages need cleaning, so don’t worry about that.To obtain a credit card for another member of your immediate family, please complete the enclosed form, making sure that both your signature and the new cardholder’s signature appear on the indicated lines.Thank you for agreeing to complete the enclosed survey. It will take only a few minutes. Use a # 2 pencil and carefully fill in the circles corresponding to your answer. Do not write in the white box in the upper right-hand corner. Fold the form along the dotted lines and seal by moistening the flap. Do not use staples or transparent tape. Your name and address are optional. Thank you!Please give Caddy a bottle around 8:30 (or earlier if she seems hungry).If she falls asleep with the bottle in her mouth, take it out. Leave her bedroom door open so you can hear her if she wakes up.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Mrs. Dollery:We were sorry to hear that your AutoAnswer communication system is unsatisfactory. All our equipment is carefully checked before leaving our Chicago factory. However, in rare cases, an intermittent problem may have been overlooked or something may have happened to the equipment during shipping.Please return your system to us, following these steps: 1. Use the original carton and packing materials to ship the system back to us.HOW TO SAY IT® / 2352. Address the box to: Customer Service, P.O. Box 1887, Woodlanders, IL 60031. (The California address is only for placing orders.) 3. Enclose a letter describing the problem (a copy of the letter you originally sent us would be fine) and mention whether the trouble occurred immediately or after use. The more information you can give us, the more quickly we can locate the problem.4. Fasten the enclosed RUSH label to the top right-hand corner of your letter. This will ensure that you receive a fully functioning machine (your present system or a new one) within ten working days.Thousands of satisfied customers are experiencing the delight and time-saving features of the AutoAnswer communications system every day; I want you to be one of them very soon.TO: Estabrook County ResidentsFROM: Estabrook County Board of Commissioners DATE: October 2RE: Yard WasteThe amount of garbage each of us produces is enormous, and so are the problems and costs of disposing of it. During the summer months grass clippings make up 24% of residential garbage.Legislation passed earlier this year requires us to separate grass clippings and leaves—yard waste—from regular trash after January 1.How do we do this?1. Leave grass clippings on the lawn. This is the most cost-effective and environmentally sound way to deal with grass clippings. They decompose, returning nutrients to the soil, and never enter the waste stream.2. Bag grass clippings and take them to one of the six County compost sites (list of compost sites is enclosed). Empty your bags of grass clippings and fill them with free compost for your garden.3. Use grass clippings as mulch around trees and shrubs (if your grass has not been chemically treated).4. Bag grass clippings and pay a trash hauler to collect them separately.For additional information call 555-2117, Estabrook County’s Compost Center.P.S. We’ve had a number of calls asking if grass clippings will ruin the lawn if left on it. You can leave grass clippings on the lawn and still keep it healthy by (1) not letting the grass get too long before mowing (clippings should be no more than one inch long in order to filter down into the soil); (2) using a sharp mower blade (the sharper the blade the finer the clippings and the faster they decompose); (3) avoiding overfertilization (dense grass doesn’t allow clippings to reach the soil to decompose); (4) removing excessive thatch (1/2 inch is ideal); (5) mowing the lawn when it’s dry.Dear William D. Carmichael,236 / HOW TO SAY IT®Beginning January I, we will be adopting an exciting new program of flexible benefits. To become part of this program, we ask that you: 1. Read the enclosed brochure, which explains the program.2. Sign up for the informational meeting that is most convenient for you (list enclosed).3. Schedule an appointment with one of the Human Resources staff to discuss the program and to ask any questions you might have. At that time you will be given a confidential record of your personal benefit program and an enrollment form to fill out specifying the way you want to “spend” your benefits.4. Return the form by October 1. This date is important. If you fail to send in your enrollment form by October 1, you will automatically be enrolled in the “no choice” plan (see brochure for description).If you have questions about this process, call Human Resources at ext.43.Dear Customer:Thank you for your inquiry about home maintenance of your recently purchased VCR. We do not recommend that owners repair their own VCRs. Although it may be more costly, a professional repair job is a better choice in the long run.However, if you are willing to accept the risks, there are some maintenance and small repair jobs you can attempt at home. You can clean the record and playback heads with a commercially manufactured cleaning cassette (read instructions before using). Note, however, that most of these special cassettes, particularly the dry kind, work by abrasion and can wear down your video heads. After unplugging your VCR, clean the interior with a soft painter’s brush and—for hard-to-reach places—a can of compressed air. You can also replace belts, rollers, switches, and springs, and can lubricate gears, shafts, and other moving parts every few years. Using a light machine oil, oil parts that spin.Grease parts that slide or mesh (but don’t use too much grease).For further information, consult the manual that came with your VCR, check with a local repair shop, or write us with your specific question.See also: ADVICE, RESPONSES.