30Letters of IntroductionWhy is it that the person who needs no introduction usually gets the longestone?—MARCELENE COXLetters of introduction are not as common as they were. The telephone has largely replaced them as a means of putting two people in touch with each other. Then, too, most people have enough social and business contacts to last several lifetimes. They are reluctant to suggest additional ones to friends unless they’re sure the proposed introduction will be genuinely beneficial to both parties.Although letters introducing people to each other are still seen, today’s letter of introduction is more commonly used to introduce a new sales representative, new product, or new service to customers.Letters of introduction are related to references and recommendations in that A is vouching for B to C. However, a letter of introduction is more like the superficial introduction that takes place at a large party, whereas the recommendation is more like a serious talk about someone your friend wants to employ.Write Letters of Introduction for• business associates/employees• friends moving/traveling to a city where you know people• introducing business/product/services to newcomers in the area (see WELCOME)• job seekers (see also REFERENCES)• membership in clubs/groups/organizations• new address/office/division/outlet/company (see also ANNOUNCEMENTS, WELCOME)• new billing procedure/statement/payment schedule• new employees/associates/partners/programs/policies/prices (see also ANNOUNCEMENTS)• new products/services (see also SALES)• requesting an introduction to someone from a third party• researcher working in the other person’s field 237238 / HOW TO SAY IT®How to Say It• Begin by stating your reason for writing: to introduce yourself, to introduce someone to your reader, to suggest that your reader meet with someone visiting or new in their area.• * Give the person’s full name, title, position, or some other “tag” to situate them for your reader.• Tell something about the person being introduced—whether it is yourself or a third party—that will make your correspondent want to meet them (“she has collected paperweights for years, and I know this is a great interest of yours”). Mention people they both know, work or school connections, interests they have in common.• Tell how you and the other person are related or acquainted.• Explain why contact with this person is desirable.• Suggest how the meeting can take place: the reader contacts the other person (include address and phone number); the other person calls your reader; you are inviting them both to lunch.• Close with an expression of respect or friendship, and your thanks or appreciation (“I will be grateful for any courtesies you can extend to Chadwick”).What Not to Say• Don’t organize introductions lightly. They set in motion responsibilities, demands on time and energy, and consequences involving several people. Reserve introductions for special cases.• Don’t insist that two people meet or predict that they will like each other. No one can tell who will take to whom. By emphasizing what they have in common, your reader can decide how much interest there might be in meeting the other person.• Don’t make the person feel obligated to accommodate you. Unwilling hospitality or grudging meetings do not have good outcomes. Allow the person room to maneuver and provide a way to save face if they must refuse you (“I realize you may not be free just now”).Tips on Writing• There are two ways of providing a letter of introduction. One is to give the letter to the person you’re introducing; the person then calls upon the third party and presents the letter. The envelope is left unsealed, which means your letter will be tactful. The second way is to write directly to the third party, asking if they would be able to meet with, entertain, or help the person you’re introducing.• Be specific about what you would like the other person to do: in-HOW TO SAY IT® / 239vite your friend to dinner; make introductions in the neighborhood; explain work opportunities in the area.Special Situations• It used to be that the letter of introduction had to be offered, unlike a letter of reference or recommendation, which is requested. In their 1942 book,How to Write Letters for All Occasions,Alexander L. Sheff and Edna Ingalls write sternly, “The note of introduction is often requested for a friend, never for one’s self.” This still applies to social introductions, but networking has changed the rules in the business world. You may tell someone you plan to be in a certain area or that you’re job-hunting and wait for the other person to suggest introducing you to friends or colleagues. But you may also actively seek introductions.• When you want A to offer hospitality to B, write A directly and ask that they respond to you. This spares B the embarrassment of presenting a personal letter of introduction only to be rebuffed because of lack of time or interest. It also spares A the awkwardness of being caught off guard and pressured into doing something they don’t really want to do.• Write a letter of thanks or appreciation to anyone who has written a letter of introduction on your behalf. You also write to thank the person to whom you were introduced for any courtesies extended to you.• Introduce new employees, business associates, or personnel to those with whom they’ll be working with a paragraph or two: their names, new positions, starting dates, responsibilities and work relationships, highlights of their professional backgrounds, and a request for others to welcome them.• Introducing a new sales representative to customers before the first visit smoothes the representative’s way. It also serves as a goodwill gesture, letting customers know that headquarters takes a personal interest in them. Express your confidence in the person’s abilities.• When introducing a change in billing procedures (new due date, automatic deposit, windowed reply envelopes, new statement format), explain why you instituted the change and, if possible, enclose a sample procedure. Focus on the value of the change to the customer, not its value to you. When you express appreciation for the customer’s business and say that the change will improve service, your letter of introduction becomes a goodwill letter or even a sales letter.• Letters introducing new products and services have strong sales messages. Only a phrase like “we are pleased to introduce” qualifies it as a letter of introduction (see SALES).240 / HOW TO SAY IT®Format• Business introductions (requests for them, the letters themselves, and thank yous) are typed on business or personal-business letterhead.A personal touch is commonly added by a handwritten note on your business card to be included with the letter or given to the person requesting the introduction.• Handwriting social introductions used to be required, but it is not necessary today.• Form letters are useful when the same message of introduction must be conveyed to a number of people and the message is not particularly personal. For example, introducing a new slate of officers to a far-flung membership, or introducing a new product line or new payment schedules to thousands of customers.• E-mail is used for very informal introductions.WORDSacquaintannounceassociatecolleagueconnectionscontactco-workergreethospitalityintroducemeetnotifypleasurepresentproposereceivesponsorsuggestvisitwelcomePHRASESacquaint you withbring together two suchbring to your attention/noticeget together withI’d like to introduce to youif you have timeI’m happy to introduce you toI think you’ll likeknown to me for many yearslongtime friendplease don’t feel obliged topresent to youshares your interest insimilar backgroundthe bearer of this letterthis letter/note will introducewe’d like to tell you aboutwe’re pleased to introduceyou’ve heard me mention/talkaboutHOW TO SAY IT® / 241SENTENCESDr. Roselli plans to be in Rome for the next two years, so if you feel able to offer him any hospitality during that time, I would be most grateful—and I think you’d enjoy meeting him.I’d appreciate any consideration you can extend to Mr. Chevenix.I feel sure you would not regret meeting the Oakroyds.I’ll appreciate any hospitality you can offer Harriet.I think you and Nathan would find you have a great deal in common.I’ve always wanted to bring you two together, but of course it will depend on whether you are free just now.I’ve asked Adela to give you a call.Thank you for whatever you may be able to do for Ms. Ingoldsby.There is little that Ms. Trindle does not know about the field; I suspect that you would enjoying talking to her.This letter will introduce Nicholas Broune, president of our local professional editors network, who will be spending several weeks in New Orleans.This will introduce a whole new concept in parent-teacher conferences.We are pleased to introduce the Reverend Duncan McMillan, who will be serving as weekend presider as of June 1.PARAGRAPHSHello! May I introduce myself? I’m Flora Mackenzie, and I’m running for city council from Ward 4. I’d like to give you a few reasons to vote for me on November 7.Sarah Purfoy of Clark Machinery will be in San Francisco February 3, and I’ve given her my card to present to you. I wasn’t sure if you knew that Clark is working on something that may solve your assembly problem. If you haven’t time to see her, Ms. Purfoy will understand.Dear friends of ours, Ellen and Thomas Sutpen, are moving to Jefferson later this month, and I immediately thought of you. They’ve bought one hundred acres not far from you, and their two children, Henry and Judith, are almost the same ages as your two. I know you’re busy just now, so I’m not asking you to entertain them or to do anything in particular—I just wanted you to know that the Sutpens are delightful people, and I think you’d enjoy them. Remember us to them if you do meet them.I would like you to meet Rachel Cameron, as I think she would be a wonderful person to run the Good Samaritan program. I’m having a small cocktail party Friday night, and I thought I could introduce you to her then. Will you come?A friend of mine whom I admire very much, Dodge Pleydon, will be242 / HOW TO SAY IT®visiting various galleries in Atlanta this next week, and I suggested he see you. I think you would be interested in his work. He is rather shy, so if you do not like what he is doing, he will take the hint quickly. He is not at all like the artist you described who camped outside your office for days at a time trying to get you to change your mind!I’ve just learned that our favorite babysitter has moved next door to you. Not only is it a small world but are you lucky! Bob Vincy is dependable, resourceful, and full of fun. I wish I could introduce you to him personally, but I hope this note will inspire you to go over and sign him up immediately.I would like to arrange a meeting with Rosamund Redding to discuss setting up small investors’ groups in rural areas. I know the two of you are good friends, and I thought it might mean something to her if I were to mention that you and I have been in the same investors’ group and on the New Beginnings Center board of directors for several years. May I use your name when I write her for an appointment?I don’t often do this, but I’m going to stick my neck out and say that I think you ought to see an engineer named Alec Harvey. The man can do anything, and I think he may be just the person to unsnarl your transportation department. I’ve asked him to give you a call, but do feel free to tell him you’re busy if you don’t want to see him. It was I who urged him to call because I’m convinced it might be worth your while.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Ms. Cardross:The account you have established with us has been reassigned within our Telemarketing Department. I would like to introduce myself as your new representative at Chambers Office Supply and take this opportunity to ask if we can be of any service to you at this time.You are currently set up with account AB 40021, and you receive a 15% discount on list prices.I notice that the printer ribbons that you normally buy are on sale this month (25% off).If you have questions regarding your account, or need assistance in any way, please contact me.Thank you for your continued business. I look forward to working with you in the near future.Sincerely,Dear Edwin,I’m going to be in New York for three weeks in June, trying to find a publisher for my book. I know that you have extensive publishing contacts there, and I wonder if you might know anyone in particular I oughtHOW TO SAY IT® / 243to see and, if so, if you would be so kind as to provide me with a letter of introduction.I hope this is not an imposition, and I wouldn’t want you to do anything you’re not comfortable with, so I’ll understand perfectly if you don’t feel you have any information that would be useful to me.In grateful appreciation,HenryDear Henry,Congratulations on finishing the book! I’m so pleased for you. And, as a matter of fact, I do know someone I think you ought to see while you’re in New York. Maud Dolomore has her own literary agency and she deals almost exclusively with biographies.I’m enclosing a brief letter that will introduce you to her. In this case I feel that I am doing both you and Maud a favor by putting you in contact with each other—I suspect your book is something she would be pleased to handle.Let me know how things turn out.With best wishes,EdwinDear Henry,I’m pleased to hear that you’ve finished the book! Unfortunately, I’ve looked through my files but don’t see anyone who would be particularly useful to you or to whom I’d feel comfortable writing a letter of introduction.Most of my contacts are now older and retired, spending their limited time and energy on their own projects. I hope you understand.Sincerely,EdwinDear Edwin,I am grateful for the letter of introduction you wrote to Maud Dolomore on my behalf.I had lunch with her, and she decided to represent my book. From finding an agent to finding a book contract is a long way, but I am pleased that the manuscript is in good hands.The next time you are in town for a conference, would you let me know ahead of time so I can take you to lunch?I will let you know immediately if Maud manages to find me a book contract. Thanks again.Yours truly,244 / HOW TO SAY IT®HenryDear Mr. De Fontelles,Thank you for your letter of August 16 asking me to introduce your son to my grandfather. Although I am sympathetic to his project, I must say no to your request. My grandfather is in very poor health.1 wish you luck interviewing some of the other former members of the Resistance.Sincerely yours,Dear Gordon and Madeline,Some good friends of ours, Nina and Charles Marsden, will be in Seattle August 18 to September 1. I usually hesitate to put strangers in touch with each other because it doesn’t seem to work out. But in this case, I have a feeling you would enjoy meeting them. They are both officers of the Midwest Appaloosa Conference and are interested in arranging reciprocal shows with groups from outside the Midwest.I’ve mentioned that I’d be writing you, but added that you are busy and may not even be in town during the last part of August, so there is certainly no obligation to call them. If, however, you have time and think you’d like to meet them, they’ll be staying at the Horseshoe Inn on Murray Road.All our best,Dear Homeowner,Let me take this opportunity to introduce you to Irmiter Contractors and Builders. Founded in 1921 by my great-grandfather, our sixty-eight years of experience have firmly established us in the home renovation, restoration, and remodeling industry.We base our professionalism on the principles of old world craftsman-ship and customer service. We are members of, actively participate in, and meet the requirements of the National Association of the Remodeling Industry (NARI) and the National Kitchen and Bath Association (NKBA).Our six decades and four generations of experience in the building trades assure you, the homeowner, of the best return for your home improvement dollar. We are dedicated to creating the perfect living space for you and your family. Irmiter Contractors does this by combining state-of-the-art products and up-to-date management techniques with time-honored traditions of quality workmanship and attention to your needs.We recently received a Regional National Kitchen Design Award from NARI and offer complete design and drafting services for any type of project. In short, we are the problem solvers for the modern family living in an older home environment.We invite you to compare, to talk to our customers, visit our jobs inHOW TO SAY IT® / 245progress! You’ll see what we’ve done, what we’re doing, and what we can do for you!Please send the enclosed card or give us a call today, and let’s get started on our most important project this year—YOUR HOME!Sincerely,Tom IrmiterPresidentP.S. We will accept invitations to bid on blueprints.See also: ANNOUNCEMENTS, APPLICATIONS, REFERENCES, REFUSALS, REQUESTS, THANK YOU, WELCOME.