31InvitationsInvitation is the sincerest form of flattery.—MARCELENE COXAll major and many minor life events are marked by occasions to which we invite family and friends. Being gregarious animals, we also celebrate non-events for the pure fun of it. Social gatherings offer friendship, entertainment, and relaxation. Invitations can range from the casual “Come visit!” scrawled on a postcard to engraved, highly codified invitations to dinner-dances.In the world of business, banquets, lunches, cocktail parties, receptions, and open houses offer opportunities to conduct business, to improve employee morale, and to encourage or solidify relationships with clients, customers, suppliers, and others.Write Invitations to• exhibitions/fashion shows/new equipment or product shows/trade shows/ book fairs• fundraising events• hospitality: lunches/dinners/teas/receptions/open houses/cocktail parties/ buffets/brunches/parties• meetings/workshops/conferences• open a store account/credit card account or to accept trial membership/ subscription/merchandise• overnight/weekend hospitality• recitals/performances• religious ceremonies• reunions—class, family• sales (see SALES)• school events• showers: baby/engagement/wedding (see also WEDDINGS)• speaking engagements: conference/banquet/workshop• tours: factory/office/plant• weddings (see WEDDINGS)246HOW TO SAY IT® / 247How to Say It• State the occasion (open house, awards banquet, anniversary celebration, dinner-dance, retirement party).• Give the date and time: month, day, year, day of week, a.m. or p.m.(In formal invitations, the time is written out: “Seven o’clock in the evening”; “a.m.” and “p.m.” are never used.)• Give the address. If necessary, include driving instructions or a map.• Mention refreshments, if appropriate.• Include the charge, if any (for fundraisers and certain other non-social events).• Enclose an engraved or printed reply card and envelope for a formal invitation (“R.S.V.P.” is noted on the invitation). Slightly less formal invitations may have in the lower left corner of the invitation“R.S.V.P.,” “R.S.V.P.,” “Please respond,” or “Regrets only,” followed by an address or phone number. Informal invitations may also request a response and furnish a phone number. If appropriate, give a date by which you need a response.• Indicate the preferred dress (black tie, white tie, formal, informal, casual, costume) in the lower right corner, when appropriate.• Let overnight guests know when you expect them to arrive and leave, what special clothes they may need (for tennis, swimming, hiking), whether they will be sharing a room with a child, will need a sleeping bag, and whether there will be other guests. Ask whether they can tolerate animals, cigarette smoke, or other potential nuisances.• Additional information might include parking facilities, alternate arrangements in case of rain, and an offer of transportation.• Express your anticipated pleasure in seeing the person.What Not to Say• Don’t use “request the honour of your presence” except on wedding invitations.• Don’t use abbreviations in formal invitations except for “Mr.,” “Mrs.,”“Ms.,” “Dr.,” “Jr.,” and sometimes military rank. Avoid initials in names. In formal invitations, write out “Second” and “Third” after a name, although you may use Roman numerals: Jason Prescott Allen III. There is no comma between the name and the numeral. There is, however, a comma between the name and “Jr.” States should be spelled out (Alabama, not Ala. or AL) as is the time (“half past eight o’clock”).248 / HOW TO SAY IT®Tips on Writing• Invitations are issued in the names of all those hosting the event.Women use whatever name they prefer (married name, business name, birth name) on invitations. The invitee responds using that name.When unsure how to address the woman, call her office or home and ask. For business invitations, hosts often use their titles and company names. Friends issue invitations together. Even groups (“The Castorley Foundation invites you…” or “The Central High School senior class invites you…”) issue invitations.• The phrase “request(s) the pleasure of your company” is suitable for any invitation but the most casual.• When you need to know who is coming, include a reply card. Of the same paper, style, and format as your invitation, this card is enclosed with a small envelope (at least 3½” X 5” inches to meet postal requirements) printed or engraved with your address and with postage on it. The card says, “M _____ [Ms., Mrs., Miss, Mr. Name to be filled in] ___ regrets ___ accepts [one is checked] for Saturday, November 20.” In some cases, “accepts” and “regrets” stand alone, and the guest crosses out the word that doesn’t apply or circles the one that does.The “M” is a puzzle to some people and contemporary usage often omits it. Printers have samples and can advise you on the format that fits your situation.• When inviting a single person or someone whose personal life is unfamiliar to you, indicate whether the invitation (1) is intended for that person only; (2) includes a friend; (3) can be taken either way as long as you are notified ahead of time.• When issuing an invitation to a family with young children, list each child by first name on the envelope on the line underneath the parents’ names; never add “and family.” Adults living in the family home should not be included in their parents’ invitation but should receive their own. Children approximately thirteen and up also receive their own invitations.• In an invitation, it is wholly inappropriate to suggest the kind of gift one wants (mentioning where one is registered or specifying that money is the gift of choice, for example). Sometimes, however, people want to specify that gifts not be given (for example, the person celebrating an eightieth birthday who has no need of gifts and no room for them). Ann Landers approved two of the solutions suggested by readers of her column: “Your friendship is a cherished gift. We respectfully request no other.” Or: “We request your help in compiling a book recalling memories from our parents’ first fifty years of marriage. On the enclosed sheet, we ask that you write one memory or event that you have shared with them and return it to us by April 26. We believe that the loving memories they have shared with you, their friends,HOW TO SAY IT® / 249would be the most treasured gift they could receive; therefore, we request that no other gift be sent.”• Some sit-down dinner invitations specify the time guests are to arrive and the time dinner will be served. These are usually sent by people whose previous dinner parties have been spoiled by late arrivals.• When dress is indicated, the following formulas are used. White tie is the most formal dress: men wear a white tie, wing collar, and tailcoat while women wear formal gowns. Black tie or formal means, for men, a tuxedo with soft shirt and a bow tie (a dark suit is not acceptable) and, for women, dressy dresses, cocktail-length dresses, or long evening wear. Semiformal means sports jackets or suits for men and dresses (but not long gowns) or dressier tops and pants for women; jeans and T-shirts are never appropriate as semiformal wear.• Mail invitations to an important event involving out-of-town guests as early as six months ahead. Guidelines for mailing invitations include: four to six weeks before a formal dinner, ball, dance, charity benefit, reception, or tea; two to four weeks before a reception or cocktail party; three weeks before a bar mitzvah or bat mitzvah; two weeks before a casual dinner or get-together.Special Situations• When issuing invitations to a casual in-house business event, send a memo or e-mail that includes: type of occasion (retirement, going-away, service anniversary, guest speaker); time, date, place; if refreshments will be served; if a collection is being taken up; an extension number to call for confirmation or information.• Invitations to religious ceremonies include: date, time, place, type of ceremony, information about reception or gathering afterwards.Invitations to a bar mitzvah or bat mitzvah can be engraved, printed, or handwritten, and should include: the young person’s full name; time, date, place; details about reception or celebration afterwards.• Invitations to a daughter’s debut are issued by the parents, whether married, widowed, divorced, or separated: “Sir Arthur and Lady Dorcas Clare request the pleasure of your company at a dinner dance in honor of their daughter Millicent on Saturday…” When simply receiving, the invitation can read: “Mrs. Sybil Fairford and Miss Elizabeth Fairford will be at home Sunday the second of June from five until half past seven o’clock, One Cooper Row.”• Invitations to a fundraising event should be clear about what is expected of those who accept (“$100 donation suggested” or “Tax-deductible contribution of $500 per couple suggested”). Your wording may be limited by the allowable meanings of “tax deductible” and“donation.” Enclose a postage-paid reply envelope to make it easy for250 / HOW TO SAY IT®people to respond; if you don’t, tell where to send the check and how to obtain tickets. Some fundraisers fail because potential donors are busy people who can’t take the time to read the small print or guess how they should handle the request; make it easy for them. Invitations to benefits, public charity balls, and other fundraisers need no response; purchase of tickets constitutes acceptance.• When inviting a guest speaker include: the name of the event and sponsoring organization; the date, time, and place; the type of audience (size, level of interest, previous exposure to subject); the kind of speech wanted; the length of time allotted and the approximate time the speech will begin; equipment available for use; accommodation and transportation information or directions to the meeting site; whether there will be a question and answer session; a description of the program; meals available; name of the contact person; details of the hon-orarium; an offer of further assistance; an expression of pleasure at having the person speak to your group. At this time you also request biographical information from the speaker to use in the program.• Sales letters are sometimes phrased as invitations to a special showing, sale, open house, or demonstration or to become a member, account holder, or subscriber.• Annual meetings are usually announced with the formal notice required by corporation by-laws, but invitations may also be sent, especially if there is a banquet or dinner following. No reply is necessary to attend the meeting, but a reply is usually requested for the dinner.• When your invitees fail to “R.S.V.P.” and you need to know how many will be attending your event, the written word is no longer useful. You will have to telephone and ask. A recently married woman wrote “Dear Abby” (Abigail Van Buren) that of the one hundred printed wedding invitations she and her fiancé sent, only three self-addressed, stamped response cards were returned, yet most of their invitees showed up at the wedding. “Dear Abby” suggested the preventive measure of replacing “R.S.V.P.” with plain English: “Please let us know if you are able to attend—and also if you arenot.” Except for formal or large events, you are probably better off inviting your guests by telephone (or at least inviting their answering machines) and then following up with an invitation in the form of a reminder.• To cancel or postpone an invitation, follow the original invitation in format, style, and quality of paper. If there’s time, the announcement is printed or engraved as the invitation was. Otherwise, handwrite the note, using the same style as the invitation: “Mr. and Mrs. Hans Oosthuizen regret that it is necessary/that they are obliged to postpone/cancel/recall their invitation to dinner on…” or “We must unfortunately cancel the dinner party we had planned for…” Urgent situations, of course, require the telephone.• To cancel an invitation that you have already accepted, call your host at once and then follow up with a note apologizing for the changeHOW TO SAY IT® / 251of plans. Stress your regret and offer a believable excuse. When you cancel at the last minute or when your cancellation is an inconvenience, you may want to send flowers with your note.Format• Formal invitations are engraved or printed on fine-quality notepaper, use a line-by-line style, and are phrased in the third person (“Terence Mulvaney requests the pleasure of your company at a dinner-dance in honor of his daughter…”). Printers, stationery stores, and large department stores offer a number of styles, papers, inks, and designs. Invitations may also be handwritten, using the same format and phrasing. The expression “requests the pleasure of your company” is appropriate for all invitations except formal weddings.Each invited person is mentioned by name and honorific (Ms., Mrs., Miss, Dr., Mr.) either on the envelope or in the invitation itself. All words, state names, and numbers less than 100 are spelled out. Abbreviations are not used. Telephone numbers and zip codes are never given on formal invitations. The zip code is usually available in the return address or on the reply envelope. Business formal invitations (awards banquet, for example) are issued in standard formal invitation format.• Informal social invitations use either commercial fill-in cards or are handwritten on informal stationery or foldovers in usual letter style (first person, run-in format). The invitation is usually written on the first page of a foldover or, if this page has your name on it, you can add the details of the invitation below your name.• Informal business invitations may be sent on letterhead stationery; in-house invitations may be issued via memo, even sometimes by email.• Invitations that are actually sales letters use a form letter format.• Commercial fill-in-the-blank invitations are available; there is nothing wrong with using these for casual gatherings. Some of them are even quite cheerful and clever.• If you entertain regularly you may want to order engraved or printed invitations with blank spaces to be filled in as needed: “Mr.and Mrs. Desmond Mulligan request the pleasure of [name’s] company at [event] on [date] at [time] o’clock, 1843 Thackeray Street.”WORDSattendcancelcelebrationcommemoratedebutfêtehonorinstallation252 / HOW TO SAY IT®occasionpleasurepostponerejoicesalutesolemnizewelcomePHRASESaccept with pleasurebe our guestbring a guestcordially invites you tohave the honor of invitingin commemoration/celebration ofin honor ofinvite you tokindly respond on or beforelooking forward to seeing youobliged to recall/cancel/postponeowing to the illness/death ofrequest the pleasure of your com-panySENTENCESA revolutionary new service is now available to valued customers—and you’re among the first invited to enroll.Are you free after work on Friday to join a few of us for dinner?Business attire is suggested.Come hear noted Reformation scholar and professor of history Dr. Margaret Heath speak on September 12 at the 8:30 and 11:00 services at Gloria Dei Lutheran Church, 1924 Forster Avenue.Horseback riding will be available; dress accordingly.I’m pleased to invite you to acquire the Golden American Bank Card.It will be so good to see you again.I urge you to look over the enclosed materials and consider this special invitation now.Mr. and Mrs. Alex Polk-Faraday regret that it is necessary to cancel their invitation to brunch on Sunday, the sixteenth of August, because of the illness of their daughter.Please confirm by June 6 that you can attend.Please join us for a farewell party in honor of Veronica Roderick, who is leaving Wain International to pursue other business interests.We invite you to apply for an account with Oxenham Leather Warehouse, Inc.You are invited to a special evening showing of our new line of furniture from European designers.HOW TO SAY IT® / 253PARAGRAPHSThe Jervis family invites you to help Laura and Frank celebrate their Golden Wedding Anniversary. An Open House will be held at the Russell Eagles Hall, from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m. on Sunday, March 10, 2002.You are invited to attend the Fall Family Festival this Tuesday evening from 6:00 to 9:00 p.m. at Temple Beth Shalom, 14 Burnsville Parkway.There will be puppet shows, activity booths, games, and refreshments!Kindly respond on or beforeSeptember 18, 2003M__________accepts/declinesNumber of persons ___You are invited to hear the National Liturgical Choir under the direction of Maugrabin Hayraddin at 4:00 p.m. Sunday, September 28, at Quentin Methodist Church, 1823 Scott Avenue. The sixty-voice chorus will sing Russian liturgical music by Gretchaninof and Kalinikof and selections by Bach, Shaw, and Schutz. The cost is $5 ($3 for seniors and students).You are invited to join the Henderson Video Club for one month—at absolutely no cost to you. Tell us which four selections you want, and they will be sent the same day we receive your order.The tenth annual Public Works Open House will be held on Tuesday, October 3, from 4:00 to 7:00 p.m. at the Evans Street yards, a block south of Owen Avenue. The whole family will enjoy it. Get your picture taken on a Public Works “cherry picker.” Car buffs can tour the biggest maintenance and repair shop in the city. There will be drawings for prizes, music, food, and entertainment. Some lucky winner will take home an actual traffic signal used for fifty years on the corner of Blodwen and Marquand Streets.SAMPLE LETTERSLucas-Dockery Importers, Inc.cordially invites you to acocktail hour and receptionin honor of their merger withSheridan International AssociatesFriday, the tenth of November254 / HOW TO SAY IT®from five to half past eight o’clockMansfield GardensOne Mansfield CommonsDear James Ayrton,You are invited to become a member of the Brodie Community Anti-Crack Coalition. Formed eight months ago, this coalition of three community councils and six community organizations was formed to oppose the activity and effects of illegal drug use and trafficking in Easdaile and especially in the Brodie neighborhood.The Brodie Community Council already has two delegates to the coalition, but we believe it would be helpful to have one more. Your name has been mentioned several times as someone with the necessary experience and enthusiasm.I’ll call later this week to discuss the possibility of your participation.Agnes Leslie Graham and Robert Grahamrequest the pleasure of your companyat a dinner-danceon Saturday, the twenty-first of Mayat seven-thirty o’clockHarcourt InnR.S.V.P.Dear Dr. Denny:It is with great pleasure that I invite you to the 43rd Annual Engineering Society Conference. This year’s Conference will be held at The Citadel Hotel in downtown Dallas from September 23 through September 27.We are offering a valuable program with industry-wide applications, speakers who are recognized experts in their field, and topics with many implications for the future (see enclosed brochure). Ample time is scheduled for discussion periods. In addition, tours to two outstanding instructional materials centers have been arranged.We have obtained special meeting rates from the management of The Citadel. Information on accommodations, transportation, and registration is enclosed.If you have questions, please call the session coordinator, A.J. Cronin, at 610/555-1889.Houghton-Maguire MarineHOW TO SAY IT® / 255cordially invites you to itsFirst Annual Marine Electronic Equipment Exhibit 1:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.Saturday, May 2, 2003Highway 32 and County Road CRefreshmentsDrawingsDear Mrs. Lucas,We are having a reception on Sunday, May 5, from 1:00 p.m. to 4:00p.m. to celebrate our joy in the adoption of our new son, Philip. It would mean a great deal to us to have you join us.Sincerely,Haidée Czelovar Power and Raoul Czelovar cordially invite you to a receptioncelebrating theGolden Wedding Anniversary ofSimone Rakonitz Czelovar and Karl Czelovar Sunday, the second of Aprilat eight o’ clockWyatt’s Village InnIndianapolisR.s.v.p. Formal Dress555-1980Special Savings Invitation!Dear Martin Lynch Gibbon:As one of our Preferred Customers, you are invited to save 10% on every purchase you make at Murdoch Jewelers on July 14 and 15. This discount applies to both sale-priced and regular-priced merchandise, and includes our line of dazzling Iris diamonds, the ever-popular Headliner watches for men and women, and our complete selection of wedding gifts.You deserve the best, and for two days this month, “the best” comes with a discount just for you!256 / HOW TO SAY IT®Note: The discount does not include labor or service charges.Dear Major and Mrs. Caswell,We are planning to celebrate Mother and Dad’s fortieth wedding anniversary with dinner at The Azalea Gardens on September 16, at 7:00p.m. We would love to have you celebrate with us.Please let me know if you can join us.Fondly,The Board of Directorsof the Finsbury United Aid Societyrequests the pleasure of your companyat a wine and cheese receptionon Saturday, the fourteenth of Mayat half past seven o’clockFinsbury Community Ballroomfor the benefit ofThe Finsbury Children’s HomeSuggested Contribution $50 Black TieSee also: ACCEPTANCES, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ANNIVERSARIES, ORGANIZATIONS, REFUSALS, RESPONSES, SALES, THANK YOU, WEDDINGS.