32Love LettersIf valentines are the equivalent of a gentle rain, love letters haveall the power and unpredictability of a tropical storm.—JENNIFER WILLIAMSThe love letter is one of the most difficult and frustrating letters to write because we want it to be perfect. Stunning. Memorable. Touching. Thrilling.Witty. Tender. Intelligent. And—did we say?—perfect.Nothing is too good for the person we love. We pick up the pen, imagining the letter that will say it all, the letter that will do everything but sing. But are our expressive skills equal to the grandeur and fineness of our love? We fear not.There are two kinds of love letters. One is written to someone who returns your love. This letter carries an automatic guarantee of success; your reader thinks everything you do is wonderful. In this chapter you can pick up a few more high cards to go with the ace you already hold.The second kind of love letter is written to someone you’re courting, someone whose love you want to win. “Special Situations” offers assistance for this type of letter.Write Love Letters to• a man• a womanHow to Say It• Open with something simple, preferably your main thought (“Dearest Leslie, I miss you” or “Dear Jack, This has been the longest week of my life!”).• Expand on your thoughts and feelings about the other person.• Recall happy times you’ve spent together in the past and mention future plans that include both of you.• Tell what you’ve been doing, thinking, feeling. The other person is hungry for news of you. Self-revelation is appealing and will usually elicit similar revelations from the other person. “I have never told 257258 / HOW TO SAY IT®you this before, but…”; “When I was little, I always dreamed that…”;“One thing I’m really looking forward to (besides seeing you again!) is…”; “My favorite way of spending a Sunday afternoon is…”• Use the person’s name—not too often, but several times anyway.There’s nothing quite as wonderful as reading our name in our lover’s handwriting (or typing).• Say the words: “I love you.” No one can hear it often enough, and lovers—especially new ones—have fears and doubts that crave reassurance.What Not to Say• Don’t be brief. “Brevity may be the soul of wit, but not when someone’s saying, ‘I love you.’” (Judith Viorst) The other person wants you to never stop talking or writing or saying how wonderful they are. Don’t stint yourself.• Don’t use language that isn’t natural to you. While you may be tempted to dress your letter in flowery or high-flown words, they will not sound like you, and you, after all, are the person your reader loves.• Don’t write a letter that requires a note at the end: “Tear this up as soon as you’ve read it.” Recipients seldom do this. If it’s a simple matter of your embarrassment, it won’t make much difference, but if the letter falls into the wrong hands (as in the case of a romance involving infidelity), you may regret putting anything on paper.• Don’t ask another person to read your letter before you send it to see if it is “okay.” The only people who know if the letter is good are you and the one you love. In 1901, Myrtle Reed wrote, “A real love letter is absolutely ridiculous to everyone except the writer and the recipient.” This is still true.Tips on Writing• Before writing the letter, jot down ideas that will lead to sentences or paragraphs in your letter: What is special or unexpected about being in love? What is it about the other person that is endearing? What touches you deeply? What do you miss? What would you do if she walked into the room right now? When do you think about her most often? What things remind you of him? What would you like to give him if you could give him anything? Why do you admire her? Be specific. Give examples of times you were filled with love.• Write from the heart. The most important quality of a love letter is its sincerity.• Keep the other person in mind as you write. Try to imagine whatHOW TO SAY IT® / 259she is thinking, feeling, and doing at this moment and to picture her later as she reads your letter.• Fatten the letter with newspaper clippings or cartoons, a dried leaf or flower, bookmark, photographs, a half-completed crossword puzzle for him to finish.• Include a new “why I love you” reason in each letter.• If you expect to write more than a few love letters, buy a book of quotations on love. They can inspire you while supplying quotations that express your feelings. Some are good for discussion: “Do you agree with Antoine de Saint-Exupéry that ‘love does not consist in gazing at each other but in looking outward together in the same direction’?” Bess Streeter Aldrich once wrote, “Love is the light that you see by.” Aldrich would probably not mind if you wrote, “You are the light that I see by,” and then tell why that is.• For inspiration, read the letters from the world’s great lovers.• For passion and fire, read Juliette Drouet writing to Victor Hugo (in Louis Gimbaud, ed.,The Love Letters of fuliette Drouet to Victor Hugo,1914):“A fire that no longer blazes is quickly smothered in ashes. Only a love that scorches and dazzles is worthy of the name. Mine is like that.”“I see only you, think only of you, speak only to you, touch only you, breathe you, desire you, dream of you; in a word, I love you!”“I love youbecauseI love you, because it would be impossible for me not to love you. I love you without question, without calculation, without reason good or bad, faithfully, with all my heart and soul, and every faculty.”“When I am dead, I am certain that the imprint of my love will be found on my heart. It is impossible to worship as I do without leaving some visible trace behind when life is over.”• For a deeply sincere but lighter touch see Ogden Nash’s letters to Frances Rider Leonard (in Linell Nash Smith, ed.,Loving Letters FromOgden Nash: A Family Album,1990):“I couldn’t go to bed without telling you how particularly marvelous you were today. You don’t seem to have any idea of your own loveli-ness and sweetness; that can’t go on, and I shall see that it doesn’t.”“Both your letters arrived this morning. Thank you. I had sunk pretty low in the eyes of the elevator man, to whom I have been handing a letter to mail nearly every night and who has evidently noticed that I have been getting nothing in return. I could sense his thinking, ‘You have no charm, sir.’ But now it’s all right again—his attitude today is as respectful and reverent as I could wish.”“I’ve been living all day on your letter…. Have I ever told you that I love you? Because I do. I even loved you yesterday when I didn’t get any letter and thought you hated me for trying to rush things. It ought to worry me to think that no matter what you ever do to me that is260 / HOW TO SAY IT®dreadful I will still have to keep on loving you; but it doesn’t, and I will.”“I’ve been reading your letter over all day, it’s so dear…. Haven’t you a photograph or even a snapshot of yourself? I want to look at and touch it, as I read and touch your letters; it helps bring you a little closer.”“Do you know what is the most delightful sound in the world? I’m sorry that you’ll never be able to hear it. It’s when I’m sitting in your library, and hear you cross the floor of your room and open the door; then your footsteps in the hall and on the stairs. In four days now—.”• For insight on a long-lasting, ever-green love, read Winston and Clementine Churchill’s letters to each other (in Mary Soames,ClementineChurchill: The Biography of a Marriage,1979): Winston to Clemmie: “I love you so much and thought so much about you last night and all your courage and sweetness.” “You cannot write to me too often or too long—my dearest and sweetest. The beauty and strength of your character and the sagacity of your judgment are more realized by me every day.” “The most precious thing I have in life is your love for me.” “Do cable every few days, just to let me know all is well and that you are happy when you think of me.” “This is just a line to tell you how I love you and how sorry I am you are not here.”“Darling, you can write anything but war secrets and it reaches me in a few hours. So send me a letter from your dear hand.” “Tender love my darling, I miss you very much. I am lonely amid this throng. Your ever-loving husband W.” “My darling one, I think always of you….With all my love and constant kisses, I remain ever your devoted husband W.” “Another week of toil is over and I am off to Chartwell in an hour. How I wish I was going to find you there! I feel a sense of loneliness and miss you often and would like to feel you near. I love you very much, my dear sweet Clemmie.”Clementine to Winston: “I miss you terribly—I ache to see you.” “I feel there is no room for anyone but you in my heart—you fill every corner.”“My beloved Winston, This is a long separation. Think of your Pussy now and then with indulgence and love. Your own, Clemmie.” “My darling. My thoughts are with you nearly all the time and though basking in lovely sunshine and blue seas I miss you and home terribly.Tender love, Clemmie.” “I’m thinking so much of you and how you have enriched my life. I have loved you very much but I wish I had been a more amusing wife to you. How nice it would be if we were both young again.”HOW TO SAY IT® / 261Special Situations• When writing to someone who doesn’t (yet!) love you as you love them, be brief rather than long. Retain some emotional distance. While you might tell an amusing anecdote about something that happened at work, you wouldn’t tell a story from your childhood that has high meaning for you. Don’t move too quickly. Instead of inviting the other person to go camping with you, ask if they’ve ever done much camping, what they thought of it. Instead of sprinkling your letter with“you” and “I” (and especially “you and I” as if you were already a couple) keep it neutral. Your goal is much like that of a letter of application: you don’t aim to get the job, you want to get the interview. You present yourself as a warm, bright, funny, interesting person so that you can keep the person’s interest long enough to present yourself as a candidate for their love.Format• Anything goes. However you choose to write (type of paper, envelope, stamp, fountain pen, felt-tip, computer, e-mail, even fax) will be an expression of who you are. You can write longhand on lined paper, on scented stationery, or on the back of your video rental receipt.You can use the same pen, ink, and paper every time so that your letters have a recognizable look even from a distance. Or you can vary your letters, sometimes on one kind of paper, sometimes typed, sometimes filling in the spaces on a greeting card. Use colorful postage stamps and rubber-stamp art on your envelopes. Or use perfectly decorous, conservative # 10 envelopes and say wild things in the letter inside.• Is it a love letter if you send it by e-mail? Sometimes. In general, however, even the most romantic e-mailed words don’t have the impact they have in a letter. A letter has come straight from the loved one’s hands. It is personal, physical, an artifact. Rereading a printed-out e-mail doesn’t do quite the same thing for us. Use e-mail for short“thinking of you” messages.WORDSattractiveblissboundlesscharmingcherishdearestdelightdesiredreamendlesseternalfascinatingfatefeelingsfiercelyforeverhandsomehappyheartheaven262 / HOW TO SAY IT®immeasurableincomparableinspiringintenselylastinglonesomelovableluckymemoriesmiracleparadisepassionatelypromisepleasureremembersoulmatesweetesttendernesstreasureunceasingundyingunforgettableuniquePHRASESfrom the first momenthardly wait for the day whenhow I long tohow much you mean to meif I had only one wishif only you knewin my heartI often think ofmake life worth livingmemories that keep me goingmiss you so muchone of the happiest moments of mylifeonly love of my lifeon my mindremember the timere-read your letterso happy to get your letterwait for the mail every daywant to hold youwhenever I think of youwhen we’re apartwithout you, I feelyou make me feelSENTENCESI couldn’t sleep last night—and you know why.I’d give anything to be able to touch you right now.I had to tell you how much I enjoyed being with you yesterday.I’ll never forget the first time I saw you.It’s too lonely without you!I’ve been carrying your last letter with me everywhere and it’s getting limp—will you write me another one?Just when I think I know everything about you, there’s a new and wonderful surprise.Two more days until I see you—I’m not sure I can wait.We’re some of the lucky ones—our love is forever.HOW TO SAY IT® / 263You are my whole world.You’re the answer to my prayers and my dreams.PARAGRAPHSYou are the first thing I think of in the morning. You are the last thing I think of at night. And guess who’s on my mind every minute in between!There is nothing I want more to do and feel less able to do than write you a beautiful love letter. And yet when I try to write, I’m wordless.I’ve been sitting here, pen in hand, for half an hour trying to express what you mean to me. Will you accept some borrowed words? Jeremy Taylor once said, “Love is friendship set on fire.” I feel them both, the fire and the friendship. Bless you for bringing them into my life.I feel more intensely alive, more intensely real, more intensely myself since I met you. As if a dimming filter had been removed, the world suddenly shouts with bright colors, sharply outlined shapes, evocative scents, intriguing textures, music, laughter, flashes of joy. You.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Nance,Because of you, I find myself filled with love for the whole world.Ruth Rendell wrote in one of her mysteries, “It is not so much true that all the world loves a lover as that a lover loves all the world.”Yes! I do! I now pat grubby children on their grubby little heads. I no longer kill mosquitoes. I straighten up crumpled weeds in the sidewalk cracks. I let dogs sniff my ankles (and, well, you know). I line up the bars of soap on the shelves at K-Mart. The world is mine, and I am its, and I love it. Maybe this is a way of saying that I love you a whole world’s worth!Kisses from meDearest Oliver,There’s only time for a quick postcard between flights, but I wanted to tell you how I treasure my last sight of you waving at the window.All I have to do is shut my eyes and I see you again.Three more days and I won’t need to shut my eyes! Until then, all my love!Dear Sophy,Scientists seem unable to measure love. I—you will not be surprised264 / HOW TO SAY IT®to discover this, knowing how talented I am!—have found a way to do it.When you go to your seminar in Denver next week, I am going to keep Traddles for you. Now you know that I am not, and have never been, a dog person. If I were a dog person, my tastes would not run to Mexican hairless dogs with bat-like ears, rat-like tails, wrinkled snouts, and, in this case, a cast on its leg.Not only will I keep Traddles (we haven’t taken the full measure of this love yet!), but I will let her sleep in my bed, I will be faithful to her finicky feeding schedule, and I will even—once or twice a day—kiss her on the lips. Or near the lips anyway. I will pet her, I will let her watch football with me and follow me around. I will take her for her daily walks, even though everyone who sees us will look at her cast, then look at me and think, “Ah, a man who abuses dogs!”And all this because I love you. So, what do you think? Have I found a way to measure love?TomSee also: APPRECIATION, FAMILY.