33MemosTalk of nothing but business, and dispatch that business quickly.—ALDUS MANUTIUSMemos may be an endangered species.The memo (short for memorandum—plural is memos, memoranda, or memorandums) grew out of a need to streamline correspondence—to communicate swiftly, directly, and concisely—among employees of the same company. There was little point in using letterhead stationery,“Dear,” “Sincerely,” and other complimentary openings and closings with co-workers, managers, and executives with whom you communic-ated constantly and who were well aware of what company they worked for.E-mail meets the same criteria and has the advantage of being faster and easier.The memo is still useful: in a small office where not everyone has access to e-mail; when the information is too confidential for e-mail; when you attach it to a report with too many pages and graphics to be easily sent electronically; when you want a message routed and signed or initialed or commented upon; for routine out-of-house communications with customers or suppliers (orders, transmitting material, acknowledgments, confirmations, inquiries).InHow to Survive From Nine to Five,July Cooper writes, “The memo’s chief function, however, is as a track-coverer, so that you can turn on someone six months later and snarl: ‘Well, you should have known about it, I sent you a memo.’”Write Memos About• announcements• changes in policy/procedure• in-house events• instructions• meetings• reminders• reports265266 / HOW TO SAY IT®How to Say It• The memo heading has four items. The most common arrangement stacks all four lines flush left:TO: Blanche ChallonerFROM: Francis LevisonDATE: Nov. 20, 2003SUBJECT: employee stock purchaseOr, capitalize only the initial letter: To: Blanche ChallonerFrom: Francis LevisonDate: Nov. 20, 2003Subject: employee stock purchaseYou may also line up the information like this: TO: Blanche ChallonerFROM: Francis LevisonDATE: Nov. 20, 2003RE: employee stock purchaseOr, arrange them in two columns:TO: Blanche Challoner DATE: Nov. 20, 2003FROM: Francis Levison RE: employee stock purchase• Select a phrase for the subject line that will immediately tell the reader the main point of your memo: “new flexible tubing”; “personal telephone calls”; “medical benefits enrollment”; “change in library hours.”• Begin the body of your message two to four lines below the subject line and flush left. All paragraphs in the body begin flush left and are separated by one line of space (text is otherwise single-spaced).• Close with a request for the action you want, if appropriate, and a date by which it should be carried out: “Please call me before Tuesday”; “Please inform others in your department”; “Send me a copy of your report by Oct. 13.”• Sign your name at the bottom of the memo or put your signature or initials next to your name in the heading.• Reference initials and enclosure notation (if any) are typed under the memo flush left.What Not to Say• Don’t include salutations or complimentary closings or any of the wind-up or wind-down sentences used in a standard business letter.You are courteous, but you get straight to the point.• Don’t use the memo for official communications (promotions and resignations, for example); type those on letterhead stationery.HOW TO SAY IT® / 267Tips on Writing• State the purpose of your memo in the first sentence.• Be concise. Use short, simple sentences with present tense and active verbs. Although memos can technically be any length, the one-or two-page memo is the norm, except for report or issue memos. The shorter the memo, the more likely it is to be read immediately.• Informality is the hallmark of memos. They are shorter and less complicated than letters. They use plainer language. Jargon and acronyms familiar to those in the company may be used. “We” is used instead of “Lamprey-Wutherwood Telecommunications, Inc.”• When sending a memo to more than one person: (1) list each name, if you have only a few, after the word “To:”; or (2) list the principal recipient after “To:” and the others at the bottom of the memo after“cc:”; or (3) list all the names in a distribution list on the last page of your memo. After “To:” type “See distribution list on page 2.” Names appear without courtesy titles (Ms., Mr.) but occasionally with professional titles (Dr.). When managers are listed, their names are often given in order of corporate rank. In some companies, alphabetic order is used.Special Situations• An issue memo is a fact-oriented report that summarizes important information so that policy decisions can be made. An efficient organization of material includes some or all of the following: (1) stating what the issue is, putting it in context, providing history or background information; (2) listing available or suggested options or solutions, along with their pros and cons; (3) detailing the costs, fiscal impact, and effects on other programs of each of the options; (4) if appropriate and welcome, naming steps necessary to implement the various options; (5) offering your recommendations; (6) suggesting the next step in the process (further study, meeting, vote, management decision).• Employees can be invited to in-house events by memo, which is more “inviting” than an e-mail message. (See INVITATIONS for guidelines.)Format• Memos are not sent on company letterhead. Some organizations have memo stationery with the company name or simply “Memo” at the top or forms preprinted with the headings. The use of computers (with a macro for memo headings) and e-mail, however, mean that dedicated memo stationery is less common.268 / HOW TO SAY IT®WORDSannouncementattachmentdeadlinefeedbackguidelinesinformationinstructionslistingnoticeoutlinepoliciesproceduresprogressproposedreminderreportrequeststatussummaryPHRASESappreciate your comments onbackground informationclarify recent changes in procedureeffective immediatelypleased to reportrequest a response byroute this message tosee below forsummarize yesterday’s discussionwould like to announce the follow-ingSENTENCESAttached is a “get well” card for Ethel Ormiston—sign it if you like and pass it on to the next name on the list.I’ve had phone calls from the following people about the new hook lifting devices—will you please return their calls and let me know what the problem is?Please initial this memo to indicate that you’ve read it.Please read the attached proposal before tomorrow’s meeting.Please sign up below for staff lounge cleanup duty and route this memo as indicated.The attached outline covers projected work through the end of the year.There’s been some confusion about the new procedures for travel reimburse-ments—please note and file the following guidelines.This memo will serve to authorize the preparation and filing of a patent application in the United States Patent and Trademark Office for a Three-dimensional Blueprint Acrylic Viewer.We are pleased to announce that last week’s sales figures as reported by the branch offices (see below) constitute a record for us.We suggest you keep these fire drill instructions posted near your desk.HOW TO SAY IT® / 269PARAGRAPHSAs of January 1, all customer 612 area code numbers given on the attached sheet will be changed to 651. Please correct your files. Note that 612 area codes not on this list remain 612. Also attached is a list of the three-number prefixes that take 612 and those that take 651 so that you can verify the correct area code for any new numbers.Devizes, Inc. will be selling company cars that are more than two years old. Employees will be given priority. Please see the attached list of vehicles with descriptions and prices.The Pudney Summer Soccer Camp has approached Potter Commercial Development Corp. to ask if some of our employees would be interested in volunteering at the Soccer Camp this summer. Attached is a brochure describing the camp and an application form for volunteers. Thank you for considering their request.Those of you who work with Priss Hartshorn will want to know that her husband of eighteen years died suddenly last night. No other details are known at present. Funeral services will be held on Saturday; for time and place, please check the newspaper. Those who want to send a note or sympathy card can write to her home address: 1963 Vassar Street, 50501.SAMPLE LETTERSTO: Dick PhenylFROM: A.W. PineroDATE: March 3, 2002SUBJECT: Internet training session on March 10So far the following people have signed up for the class. Will you please arrange with their supervisors for their absence that day? It also looks as though we’re going to need a larger room and a few more computers. Can you arrange it? Thanks.TO: See routing listFROM: Beck KnibbsDATE: June 10SUBJECT: Department picnic at Talbothays Farm Listed below is everything we need for the picnic. Please pencil in your name after the item you’re willing to bring and keep this memo moving! The last person should return it to me. Thanks.TO: See distribution listFROM: Human Resources270 / HOW TO SAY IT®DATE: August 28SUBJECT: Design department/reduced schedule Elfine Hawk-Monitor will be working a reduced schedule in the design department for the next three weeks. She will be here on Mondays and Tuesdays only as she is preparing for her gallery exhibit of sculptures made solely from scrap metal. (See the current newsletter for dates and the location of her show.) We all certainly wish her weld…I mean well. This schedule is effective as of August 25 and I’ll keep you posted on any changes. We will welcome Ms. Hawk-Monitor back full-time in mid-September and hope she won’t have gotten rusty in the interim.See also: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ANNOUNCEMENTS, E-MAIL, INSTRUCTIONS, REPORTS, REQUESTS, RESPONSES.