34Letters to NeighborsWhile the spirit of neighborliness was important on the frontier because neighborswere so few, it is even more important now because our neighbors are so many.—LADY BIRD JOHNSONThe search for harmony among neighbors is as old as human society. And there’s been no dearth of advice on how to achieve it. In a much-consulted etiquette book written in 1902,The Correct Thing,Florence Howe Hall writes,“It is not the correct thing to take offense if a neighbor states civilly that he would prefer your children should cease from breaking his windows.” Of course! Why didn’t we know that?Most troublesome issues between neighbors can be handled with common sense and good will. InMiss Manners’ Guide for the Turn-of-the-Millennium,Judith Martin says, “The challenge of manners is not so much to be nice to someone…as to be exposed to the bad manners of others without imitating them.”Write Your Neighbors to• alert them to neighborhood problems• announce personal or business news• complain (see COMPLAINTS)• congratulate them• express appreciation• introduce your local business to them• invite them to a neighborhood gathering (see also INVITATIONS)• offer help• send birthday or anniversary wishes (see ANNIVERSARIES)• thank them for assistance or cooperationHow to Say It• Be certain that writing is the appropriate road to take. If you’ve already had several unproductive in-person or telephone discussions about the issue, it probably is. Dealing with a problem face to face 271272 / HOW TO SAY IT®keeps it smaller; once the discussion escalates to a letter, the situation becomes complicated.• State your message (“thank you,” “congratulations,” “we invite you,”“have you heard”). If you’re asking something, be specific: stay off our new grass, trim trees that extend onto our property, contribute toward repairing a common fence.• When appropriate, offer to reciprocate or in some indirect way express your desire to be a good neighbor.• Close with a pleasantry, compliment, or forward-looking remark.What Not to Say• Don’t accuse. This will put your neighbor on the defensive, a position that rarely apologizes or changes. Use an indirect construction. Instead of “You never put the lids on your garbage cans properly—no wonder it all ends up here!” say, “I’m finding garbage in the alley every Thursday morning.” Instead of “Your wind chimes are driving us crazy,” say “We are having trouble sleeping at night because of the wind chimes.”• Don’t generalize (“you always park in front of our house” or “you never shovel your walk”). It undercuts your position and angers the other person who can think of lots of times they shoveled their walk.Tips on Writing• If you are in the habit of sending your neighbors notes of thanks, appreciation, congratulations, or just saying “I’m thinking about you,”you will have a good basis on which to build when problems crop up.Special Situations• Apartment living is grand when the owner and neighbors are.For letters about problems, see COMPLAINTS.• Noisy, aggressive, or trespassing pets are a common sore spot. In all but the most egregious cases (obvious animal abuse, for example), you will not get much help from police or other authorities. Know from the outset that the solution to the problem most likely depends on how well you deal person-to-person with the pet’s best friend. At the least, try honey before you go for the vinegar.• Unruly, unsupervised, or otherwise troublesome children are a neighborhood perennial. “Give the neighbors’ kids an inch and they’ll take the whole yard.” (Helen Castle) A letter is written only after you have spoken kindly with the child and, if that is not successful, with a parent. Describe how the situation appears to you, using “I” state-HOW TO SAY IT® / 273ments (not “you” statements, as in “you let her run wild”). Offer to help resolve it or show yourself willing to compromise, if possible.• In a dispute, attempt to see the issue from your neighbor’s point of view. The more clearly you see the other person’s side, the more effectively you can frame the discussion so that your neighbor derives some benefit or saves face in some way, thus opening the way to a solution.• Build a sense of community with invitations to an annual block party, picnic, or ice cream social. Prevention of neighborhood problems is much more fun than most cures.Format• Handwritten or typed notes can be hand-delivered or sent by mail or even by e-mail.WORDSadmireagreementappreciateattentioncarefulconcernedconsideratecooperationcoordinategeneroushelpfulkindnessneighborlyrespectresponsibilitysharesocializesolutiontroublingupkeepPHRASESaffecting the neighborhoodask your help/cooperationblock watchcombined actioncommunity councilcoordinate our effortsdid you knowget together to discusshappy to help withhope you are willing toimportant to all of usinform you thatnot really my business buton behalf of the neighbors oppositeyoureluctant to writewanted you to be aware thatwhat would you think ofwould you consider274 / HOW TO SAY IT®SENTENCESAs a result of the fire last week at Opal and Paul Madvig’s, they need warm school clothes for the kids, blankets and bedding, and kitchen utensils—if you can help, call me, will you?On behalf of my family and several of the neighbors, I’m writing to ask you to make other arrangements for Cleo when you are at work during the day—her constant barking is a serious problem for the neighborhood.Thanks for your comments on our new sod last week—it’s about time we did something about the yard!Thanks so much for taking care of things while we were away—we look forward to doing the same for you.This is a long overdue note of appreciation to you for arranging the alley-plowing each winter.We have corn coming out of our ears (and, oddly enough, ears coming out of our corn)—if you can use some, please help yourselves.We’ve been so delighted to have you for neighbors that it’s difficult to write this letter.Your daughter is the most dependable newspaper carrier we’ve ever had—I’m writing her a note, but I also wanted you to know what a delight we think she is.PARAGRAPHSThis is to let you all know that Ajax is having a graduation party for about twenty of his friends Friday night. Bill and I will be home all evening, but if it gets too loud for you give us a call (I’m hoping you won’t need to do that).I’ve just heard that Rosa Klebb is in the hospital with a broken hip.Would the seven families on this block want to buy a plant for her—perhaps something she could later plant in her garden? I’ll be glad to buy it and take it to the hospital. I’ll stop by tomorrow to see what you think and to have you sign the card.I’m ordering trees to replace the ones we lost in the storm. I’ve found a great nursery in Wisconsin with the healthiest trees and the lowest prices of any place I’ve checked. There’s a discount for bulk orders so if any of you are also thinking of buying trees now, check out the attached list of trees and prices available. If some of you ordered the same time I do we’d all save on delivery charges plus we’d get a more favorable rate.I’d like to ask Olivia and Kate to feed the rabbit and play with her a little while we’re gone. Would this be okay with you? I’d leave a key with them and they could come and go when they liked. I feel sure they’d be good about locking up behind them.HOW TO SAY IT® / 275I wonder if you’re aware of zoning regulations prohibiting small businesses in this area. I’m guessing it wouldn’t be a problem for the neighbors if your students didn’t take up all the street parking three nights a week.SAMPLE LETTERSHello Neighbor!The Darnel-Greaves Community Council (District 14) is celebrating its 10th anniversary in the green space Saturday, July 15, from 1 p.m. to 4 p.m. We invite you not only to enjoy the refreshments and some good conversation with your neighbors but to consider joining us in making our neighborhood a better place to live. (The only “cost” of belonging is to attend monthly meetings when you can.) In the last ten years the Darnel-Greaves Community Council has organized a recycling program, offered free radon checks of your home, bought bulk quantities of longlife light bulbs, lobbied for three new“Stop” signs, AND saved the green space from development!See you Saturday!Hi Imogen and Jack!I offered to take care of Winifred Forsyte’s sidewalks this winter (oh, the pride and energy of the owner of a new snowblower!) but I’ve got to be out of town next week. Would you mind clearing her sidewalks when you do your own? Knowing you, you will generously say yes, but if there’s a problem, give me a call before Friday, will you? Thanks!Dear Mr. Ancrum,My name is Dora Lomax and I live around the corner from you at 1892Ward Avenue. I noticed that you have a large pile of red bricks and a stack of old picket fence sections in your backyard. Tf you have no use for them and are planning to get rid of them, I’d love to take them off your hands and use them for my own backyard and garden.I will tap on your door and introduce myself in the next day or two.Otherwise I would be happy to hear from you (555-6755). You may have your own plans for the bricks and picket fencing or they may already be spoken for. Perhaps you had planned to sell them? But if not and if I may have them, I would be grateful.Thank you very much!Sincerely,See also: ANNIVERSARIES, APOLOGIES, CONGRATULATIONS, INVITATIONS, REQUESTS, SENSITIVE, THANK YOU.