35Letters Dealing with OrdersIf it is good and I want it, they don’t make it anymore.—ELIZABETH C. FINEGANStandardized order forms, purchase forms, and requisition forms, along with 24-hour toll-free order lines and the convenience of buying and selling on the Internet, have almost entirely done away with letters dealing with orders. However, as long as human beings are ordering and filling orders, there will be errors, exceptions, special requests, and problems to write about.Write Letters About Orders When• acknowledging/confirming receipt of order/telephone order/delivery date (see also ACKNOWLEDGMENTS)• asking for additional information (see also REQUESTS)• canceling/changing an order• complaining about an order (see COMPLAINTS)• explaining procedures/policy changes/overpayments• inquiring about order/delivery date/how to return merchandise• instructing how to order/return goods (see INSTRUCTIONS)• making adjustments (see ADJUSTMENTS, APOLOGIES)• payments are late (see COLLECTION, CREDIT)• placing an order• refusing/returning an unsatisfactory orderHow to Say It• When ordering without a form, give: description of the desired item, quantity, size, color, personalization/monogram, and price. Include your name, address, zip code, daytime phone number, e-mail address, and method of payment. If you pay by bank card, include number, expiration date, and signature. When buying from a company in your home state, add sales tax to the total. Include stated handling charges and specify shipping directions or any special considerations.276HOW TO SAY IT® / 277• Indicate the date by which items must be delivered. You can thus generally cancel the order without forfeit if you don’t receive it in time; the letter serves as an informal contract.• To respond to orders received, use an all-purpose form for problems.Begin with “Thank you for your order. We are unable to ship your merchandise at once because…” and list possible problems so that one or more can be circled, underlined, or checked off. For example:“Payment has not been received.” “We no longer fill C.O.D. orders.Please send a check or money order.” “We cannot ship to a post office box. Please supply a street address.” “We are currently out of stock—may we ship later?” “We no longer carry that item. May we send a substitution of equal value and similar style?” “Please indicate size (quantity, style, color).” “We must receive shipping and handling charges before processing your order.”What Not to Say• Don’t include other business (request for new catalog, complaint about a previous order, request for preferred-customer status) when ordering. It may delay your shipment.Tips on Writing• When ordering, arrange your request so that it can be deciphered at a glance. Instead of phrasing an order as a sentence (“I would like to order six pairs of size 11 men’s white sports socks and four pairs of size 11 men’s black dress socks, at $7.95 per pair…”), type the information in columns or units of information, each on a separate line. Use Arabic numerals (“12 Menaphon harmonicas”) instead of writing them out; they are more quickly read.• Don’t forget the niceties. In the nuts-and-bolts world of ordering it’s easy to forget that real live people are on the other end. Buyers close their letters with, “Thank you for your prompt attention.” Suppliers always say, “Thank you for your order” and indicate their readiness to be of service to the customer and an appreciation of their business; helpful, courteous responses serve as goodwill letters.Special Situations• If your first order wasn’t received and you order the same items again, emphasize that it’s a duplicate order. The first order may turn up later and also be filled.• When canceling a prepaid order or asking for a refund, include: order, invoice, or reference number; date of order; description of278 / HOW TO SAY IT®merchandise. Specify whether the amount of the merchandise should be credited to your account, credited to your charge card, or returned to you as a check.• To return merchandise, include in your cover letter: your name and address; item description; copy of sales slip, invoice, or shipping label; why you’re returning it; request for a refund, credit to your account, or replacement merchandise; an expression of appreciation. If returning the merchandise is difficult because of its large size or fra-gility, write first and ask how it should be returned. Request (although you may not get) reimbursement for your shipping costs.Format• Orders were made for forms, and vice versa. Simplify dealing with orders by creating standardized forms for the original order, problem orders, refunds, returned merchandise, and any other routine correspondence. Include such items as: customer’s name, business name or title, address, zipcode, telephone number with area code, email address, fax number; customer’s account number; description of merchandise, page where it appears in catalog, quantity, size, color, type; monogram or personalization; price per unit; total price for each item; shipping and handling chart; sales tax information; amount enclosed; shipping information (options available plus shipping time); space for bank card number, expiration date, and signature; spaces for signatures from purchasing department or other authorization.• Individualized letters dealing with orders are typed on letterhead or memo stationery.• If writing about a personal order from your home, a handwritten note is acceptable if clearly written.WORDSbilledcancelchangechargeconfirmdepositexpeditefreightgoodshandlingimmediatelyinvoiceitemsmerchandiseovernightoverpaymentreceiptrushstockunderpaymenturgentwarehouseHOW TO SAY IT® / 279PHRASESas soon as possible/at oncebeing shipped to youconfirm your orderdelivery date ofenclosed is my check forhereby confirmI would like to ordermust cancel my order ofnext-day deliveryplease advise us/let us knowplease bill toprompt attentionretail/wholesale pricereturn receipt requestedship C.O.D.shipping and handling chargesSENTENCESAlong with your order I’m enclosing our spring catalog as I think you’ll want to know about our new lower prices (many are lower than last year’s!) and our completely new line of Strato work clothes.If you cannot have the storage cabinets here by October 3, please cancel the order and advise us at once.Please bill this order to my account # JO4889 at the usual terms.Please cancel my order for the Heatherstone china (copy of order enclosed)—the three-month delay is unacceptable.Please charge this order to my Carlyle First Bank Credit Card # 333-08-4891, expiration date 11/04 (signature below).Please check on the status of my order # 90-4657 dated March 1.Please confirm receipt of this order by fax or telephone.Please include your account number/invoice number/order number on all correspondence.We acknowledge with thanks your order of August 19 for one Pumblechook self-closing, self-latching chain link gate.We are pleased to inform you that both your orders were shipped this morning.We are sorry to advise you that we will be out of that particular piano tuning kit (# P11507) indefinitely.We are unable to fill your order dated June 3 because your account is currently in arrears.We hope you enjoy your personalized stationery, and will think of us for your other stationery needs.Your order # KR45G is being processed and should be shipped by August 1.280 / HOW TO SAY IT®PARAGRAPHSThis is to confirm receipt of your order # 104-1297 dated June 17, 2002.It will be shipped on or about June 26. Please allow two to three weeks for arrival. If you need to contact us again about this order, use our reference number, 442-48895.We appreciate your order # GR3 315 for the exposed aggregate.However, we no longer ship C.O.D. Please send a check or money order for $782.11 so that we can expedite your order.Please note that you received a special price on the sheet protectors.Your refund check for the overpayment is enclosed.We are trying to match exactly the interior folders we use for our hanging files. The ones shown in your current catalog, page 217, look very much like ours. Could you please send us samples in several colors so that we can be sure before ordering?With one exception, your order is being shipped to you from our Gregsbury warehouse this week. The six desktop calculators are coming from our Chicago warehouse, and we’ve been experiencing some delays from that warehouse recently. You may not receive the calculators until approximately March 8. Please let us know if this is acceptable.Thank you for your purchase order (# K12291944) of July 9 for the Bascomb stairway elevator. Your order has been forwarded for fulfill-ment, and your Purchasing Department will be contacted with information about terms and shipping dates.It was my impression that we agreed upon a delivery date of May 15.The confirmation I have just received gives June 15. This will unfortunately be too late for us. Please let me know at once if this was a clerical error or if we have a serious problem on our hands.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Ritson Projectors:We have just received the audio cassette front-and rear-screen slide projector we ordered from you on November 3 (copies of order and invoice enclosed). One of the lenses appears to have been broken in transit.Please let us know whether we should return the entire projector to you, take it to a service center if you have one in the vicinity, or have it repaired and bill you.Yours truly,Dear Dr. Sturmthal:Thank you for your purchase order # H459991, which we received on June 3, for the TEM-500 Transmission Electron Microscope. Your order has been sent to our Administration Department and your PurchasingHOW TO SAY IT® / 281Department will be advised directly as to the confirmation of terms and shipping dates.Teresa Desterro, Manager of the Sales Department, located in our Gillespie office, will advise you of confirmed delivery dates and can provide you with answers to questions on order processing or shipment expediting. Alec Loding, National Service Manager, also located in our Gillespie Office, will send you complete information on the installation requirements of your new TEM-500. Both Ms. Desterro and Mr. Loding can be reached directly by calling 212/555-1212.We appreciate your order and the confidence you have shown in our company and in our instruments. We look forward to hearing from you either now or in the future if there is any way in which we may be of assistance to you.Sincerely yours,TO: Conford ConfectionsFROM: Alexander TrottDATE: June 3, 2003I have been buying your Conford Confections for family, friends, and business acquaintances twice a year (Easter and Christmas) for many years. I will be traveling in Europe this summer and would like to take along Confections to offer friends and business acquaintances there.My questions:1. Do Confections need to be refrigerated, either to maintain good quality and appearance or to ensure that there is no product spoilage?2. Do you have outlets for your product in Europe? (I would not like to cart them along as a “special treat” and then find them being sold everywhere over there.)3. Is there any other reason that would prevent me from taking Confections with me? (Do they melt easily, for example?) If you can reassure me on the above points, please place my order for: 6 boxes8 oz. Gift Box$7.9510 boxes14 oz. Supremes$12.95My check for $197.83 (including sales tax and shipping and handling) is enclosed. Please ship to the letterhead address.If you think the Confections won’t travel well, I’ll appreciate your saying so and returning my check.See also: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ADJUSTMENTS, APOLOGIES,282 / HOW TO SAY IT®COLLECTION, COMPLAINTS, CREDIT, INSTRUCTIONS, REFUSALS, RESPONSES.