36Letters Related to Organizationsand ClubsPlease accept my resignation. I don’t want to belong toany club that would accept me as a member.–GROUCHO MARXOver 20,000 organizations are listed in theEncyclopedia of Associations(Gale Research Company), and many other clubs, societies, and groups function in less formal ways to provide people with ways of sharing interests, goals, professional information, and recreational activities.Most club or organization correspondence is brief, routine, and easily written. But every announcement, invitation, or letter also represents the organization to its members and to the public and thus needs to be accurately written and attractively presented.Write Letters Dealing with Clubs/Organizations for• announcements: meetings/changes/reminders (see also ANNOUNCEMENTS)• invitations: organization events/speaking engagements (see also INVITATIONS)• meetings: canceling/changing• recommending new members (see also REFERENCES)• recruiting new members• requests: membership/sponsorship/applications/volunteers/ information/copies of agenda or minutes• resignations• welcoming new members (see also WELCOME)How to Say It• When announcing a meeting, include: the name of your organization; date, time, and place of the meeting; a phone number for further information; at least one reason why a person would want to attend 283284 / HOW TO SAY IT®the meeting (celebrity guest speaker, special election, panel discussion, book signing).• When inviting a speaker, include: your organization’s full title; an estimate of the audience size; a description of the group’s interests so the speaker can tailor the talk to them; available equipment (overhead projector, microphone); directions or map; name and phone number of contact person.• When recruiting new members, an attractive brochure describing the group and its goals and activities may best “sell” you to others.Send it along with a friendly cover letter that emphasizes the group’s strong points and tells why your organization would be appropriate for this person.What Not to Say• Avoid putting anything negative on paper. Personality conflicts, disagreements and disputes over policies, and shifting allegiances give groups their dynamism and distinct character, but they are best handled face to face. Committing delicate situations to letters that end up in public files is unwise.• Avoid paternalistic, top-down language in letters. Most groups today have a collegial rather than hierarchical spirit. Although there may be officers or leaders, everyone in the organization feels some ownership of it.Tips on Writing• Unless you write on behalf of a small, casual group, keep letters to members dignified, businesslike, and somewhat formal. Spuriously intimate letters are offputting to some people, whereas a reserved letter appears less warm but certainly not offensive.• Spell members’ names correctly. The mutilation of our names on mailing labels has become routine, but no one likes to see it from their professional or social group.Special Situations• You may be asked to do a favor or write a recommendation for someone in your club or society whom you don’t know well. By virtue of association and club kinship, there is a subtle pressure to respond positively. But you are no more obliged in this case than in any other (see REFUSALS).• The word “chairman” has generally been replaced by “chair.”(Other choices include moderator, committee/department head,HOW TO SAY IT® / 285presiding officer, presider, president, convener, coordinator, group coordinator, discussion/ group/committee leader, head, organizer, facilitator, officiator, director, administrator.) Some people use“chairwoman” and “chairman,” but “chairwoman” is perceived as a less weighty word and it is seldom used as an exact match for “chairman.” “Chairperson” is a self-conscious term used mostly for women.The short, simple “chair” was the original term (1647), with “chairman”coming into the language in 1654 and “chairwoman” in 1685. Using“chair” as both noun and verb parallels the use of “head” for both noun and verb. (People who are upset about being called “a piece of furniture” apparently have no problem with the gruesome picture of a “head” directing a department, division, or group, nor is there evidence that anyone has confused people chairing meetings with their chairs.)Format• Type all club or organization business correspondence. An exception might be a social club in which the members know each other well and handwrite notes to each other.• E-mail messages and postcards are wonderfully useful in getting out meeting notices, announcements, invitations, and short messages.• For an organization of any size, your mailing list should be computerized; combining such a list with the merge function of most word processing systems simplifies correspondence.WORDSactionaffiliationagendaallegianceallianceassociationbenefitbylawscoalitioncommitteeconstitutioncontributionestablishgenerousguildheadquartersheritageidealsimprovelegacyleaguenominatepoliciespositivepracticalprinciplesproceduresprogramprogressprojectqualificationsregulationsrulessocietysupportunwaveringvaluablewelcomeworthwhile286 / HOW TO SAY IT®PHRASESa credit to the organizationaffiliated/associated withall-out effortboard of directorscommittee chaircommon goalcooperative spiritcredit to us allhave been elected a member ofjoin forcesminutes of the meetingservice to the communityslate of officerstake pride in nominatingunfortunately must resignworthwhile causewould like to nominate you forSENTENCESEnclosed please find names of hosts, meeting dates, and topics for the next six months.I am sorry to inform you that family illness obliges me to step down from the club vice-presidency, effective immediately.It is with great pleasure/regret that I accept/decline your nomination to the Board of Directors of Montmorency House.I would be happy to discuss any questions you have about the Club over lunch some day next week.I would like to recommend/wish to propose Brander Cheng for membership in the Burke Orchestra Society.Join now and take advantage of this limited offer to new members.Our annual fundraising meeting to plan events for the next year will be held August 3 at 7:00 p.m.—all are invited.Please accept my resignation from the Rembrandt Society.To join the Frobisher Society today, simply indicate your membership category on the enclosed form and return it with your check.Would you be willing to staff the Club’s concession stand at the High-Lake Street Fair?Would you please place the following three items on the agenda for the November meeting?PARAGRAPHSThe Belford Area Women in Trades Organization invites you to attend its next monthly meeting, Thursday, June 14, at 7:30 p.m. in the oldHOW TO SAY IT® / 287Belford Union Hall. Get to know us. See what we’re trying to do for women in trades in this area. And then, if you like what you see, join up! Introductory one-year membership is $45, and we think we can do as much for you as you can do for the Organization!This is to acknowledge receipt of your membership application. You will hear from us as soon as we have received all your references and evaluated your application. Thank you for your interest in the Society.I understand you and some other employees have formed several noon-hour foreign language clubs. I would be interested in joining your Italian-speaking group. Can you put me in touch with whoever is in charge of it? Thanks.Congratulations to our new officers, elected at the September 12meeting: Truda Silber, president; Martin Lynch Gibbon, vice-president; Andrew Davies, secretary; Maria Eleonora Schoning, treasurer. They will be installed at the beginning of the October 15 meeting. Our most sincere gratitude is extended to last year’s officers, who saw the Club through a remarkable expansion and a rewriting of the bylaws. Thanks, Fran, Leo, Rose, and Dennis!Notice: The Professional Educators Network will not hold its regularly scheduled monthly meeting on February 10 at 7:30 p.m. We regret any inconvenience this cancellation may cause you. The next meeting will be held March 8 at 7:30 p.m. in the Schley Library meeting room.We are all, of course, very sorry to see you resign, but we understand that you have many other obligations at this time. We will be happy to welcome you back whenever your circumstances change. It’s been wonderful having you with us.Thanks so much for helping to clean up after the dance last Saturday.It’s certainly not a popular job, which makes me appreciate all the more the good-hearted folks who did pitch in. The next time you’re on the clean-up committee, you can put my name down!SAMPLE LETTERSDear Hugh,As a member and current secretary of the Merrivale Philatelic Society, I’m always on the lookout for other stamp collectors. Someone happened to mention yesterday that you have been collecting for years. Would you be interested in joining us?Because some of the members have quite valuable collections, we are careful to accept newcomers only on the basis of three references in addition to the recommendation of a member.I would like to propose you for membership, if you think it’s something you would enjoy. I’m enclosing some information that will tell you a little more about the group and its activities.288 / HOW TO SAY IT®Let me know if you’re interested, because I’d be pleased to sponsor you.Sincerely,To: Board of DirectorsIt is with much regret that I resign my position as Secretary of the Macduff Drama Club. Family complications necessitate that I withdraw from any evening activities at least for the foreseeable future. If I can be of any help to my successor, I am available by telephone.I have thoroughly enjoyed my association with the Macduff Club. Best wishes to all of you. I look forward to joining you again as soon as possible.Dear Friend,There is something remarkable and unique about the Tropical Fish & Aquarists Club. For one thing, it really is a club, not an organization whose “membership benefits” amount to little more than having your name on a mailing list and receiving a monthly magazine.When you join the Tropical Fish & Aquarists Club, you don’t belong to it—it belongs to you. You have the option of meeting with other hobbyists in large, small, or special-interest groups as often as you and your co-enthusiasts want. You are entitled to four free five-line ads per year in a magazine that reaches thousands of other hobbyists. We’ll extend your subscription to the magazine for one year if you contribute an article for publication. And, at the end of each year, we share any profits from membership fees and magazine revenues with members.You don’t belong to the Club; it belongs to you!Yours truly,See also: ANNOUNCEMENTS, FUNDRAISING, INVITATIONS, REFERENCES, REFUSALS, REQUESTS, RESPONSES, WELCOME.