37Query LettersA query letter is really a sales letter without the hype.—LIEL EISENHEIMERA query is a brief, well-written letter that sparks an editor’s interest in publishing your article or book and ideally results in a request to submit the manuscript. A combination request letter and sales letter, the query letter is also used to persuade a literary agent to represent you or to pique someone’s interest in a business proposal.Editors like the query letter because it allows them to decide quickly if the idea is suitable for them and if it’s interesting enough to pursue.They also use a good query letter to help them sell the idea in turn to their colleagues at editorial meetings.For unagented writers, the query letter is the only way to approach publishers who no longer accept unsolicited manuscripts. And it may be a good way to approach even those publishers who do. Once an editor responds to your query letter with an invitation to send your manuscript, you can mark the package “Requested Material” and your manuscript will not end up doing time in the slush pile. You’ll also know in advance that they’re looking for material like yours.Write Query Letters for• books• business opportunities• dramatic scripts• filmscripts/screenplays• journal and review articles• literary agents• magazine articlesHow to Say It• Address your query to the right person. Familiarize yourself with the periodical or publishing house so that you are certain your material is suitable for them. Obtain the name and title of the editor receiv-289290 / HOW TO SAY IT®ing queries for your type of book or article (from a market book, online source, friend, writing group). Call the publisher and verify that the person is still there, that the name is spelled the way you have it, and that the person’s title is current. (Don’t speak to the editor; an operator, receptionist, or editorial assistant can answer your questions.)• Orient your reader quickly to the purpose of your letter (“Would you be interested in seeing a 10,000-word article on…?”).• Establish a strong hook to keep the editor reading. Some query letters open with the first paragraph of the proposed article or book.• Tell what type of book or article it is (reference, biography, children’s), how long it is (in number of words), its intended audience, and its title. In a few sentences, describe the work so that the editor itches to read it; this paragraph must be your finest writing.• Tell why your article or book is different from others on the same subject, why you’re the best person to write it (mention relevant expertise or knowledge), and why you chose this particular publisher.• List your past publications.• Thank the person for their time and attention.• Include a self-addressed stamped envelope (SASE). Always. Every time.What Not to Say• Don’t discuss payment, royalties, rights, or other business issues in the query letter; it isn’t appropriate at this stage of the process.• Don’t include personal information (age, marital status, hobbies, education) unless it is highly relevant to the proposed work. You do, of course, include your full name, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and fax number.• Don’t use gimmicks to attract an editor’s attention. Editors know how to zero in on the heart of the work and are not swayed by colored typefaces, joke or riddle openings (unless, of course, it’s a joke or riddle book), or glitzy approaches. They usually consider gimmicks the mark of an amateur.Tips on Writing• Follow instructions on how to query. Publishers that accept e-mail queries will say so; if they mention a self-addressed stamped envelope (SASE) they prefer a written query. Most publishers offer writer’s guidelines; get a copy (either from their website or by writing and enclosing an SASE) for any publisher you are interested in selling to.• In general, address your query to associate editors and assistantHOW TO SAY IT® / 291editors, who are more likely to read your letter than are executive editors or editors-in-chief.• Your letter is one page long—two at the most. “A query letter is like a fishing expedition; don’t put too much bait on your hook or you’ll lose your quarry. Be brief and be tantalizing!” (Jane von Mehren)• Convey your enthusiasm for the material.• A clever, memorable, or intriguing title (as long as it’s appropriate to the material) is helpful to your cause. It doesn’t have to be your final title; select a working title or choose one solely for querying.• Proofread your letter as many times as it takes to be certain there are no spelling, punctuation, grammar, or usage errors; they can be fatal.• Multiple submissions involve sending the same manuscript to several editors at the same time. There is little agreement among authors and editors about the advisability of submitting multiply. In general, you can query several editors at the same time about the same project. A decision about submitting multiply is then made only if several editors reply to your query letter by asking to see the manuscript.• For assistance on writing great query letters, see John Wood,Howto Write Attention-Grabbing Query & Cover Letters,and Lisa Collier Cool,How to Write Irresistible Query Letters,both published by Writer’s Digest Books. There are also sections on query letters in books such as Judith Appelbaum,How to Get Happily Published,4th ed., HarperPerennial, and Poets & Writers, Inc.,Into Print,Quality Paperback Book Club.Special Situations• The query letter has traditionally been used for works of nonfiction, but it is also being requested today for works of fiction. In those cases, the query letter is actually a cover letter, and an outline or synopsis and sample chapters are attached. To query about a fiction project, follow the guidelines in this chapter except that plot, characters, conflict, and resolution are described in the paragraph outlining your story or novel.• Unpublished writers commonly fear that someone at the publishing house will steal their idea after reading their query letter. This is an exceedingly rare and undocumented occurrence. In any case, there are no new ideas. What is always new—and saleable—is the way the idea is clothed and presented. Even two people working on the same idea (there are supposedly only thirty-six dramatic situations) will produce significantly different works. Then, too, how will you get published if you don’t send a query letter? This is the way it’s done.• When selling a reader on a business venture or idea, attach copies of charts or reports showing past successes, your resume, your credit292 / HOW TO SAY IT®and business references, and any other data that relate to your proposal. Your object is to persuade the person to meet with you and discuss the matter. This letter differs from the literary query letter; you might profitably check with the chapters on APPLICATIONS, REPORTS, RESUMES, SALES.Format• Query letters are always typed, preferably on personal letterhead stationery. Don’t try to fit more than usual on the page by using a smaller typeface or reducing margin space.• E-mail queries are being accepted by some editors (you can tell who they are because their e-mail addresses are listed in marketing reports). Check to see if there are any special e-mail requirements.• Query by fax only if you have been invited to do so or if the market information suggests it.WORDSappealaudienceconsidercontemporaryexpertisefeaturefictioninterestedmanuscriptmaterialnonfictionoutlineoverviewpublicationround-upreviewsummarysynopsisviewpointPHRASESabout 2,500 wordsaimed at long-distance runnersfirst-person narrativemost recent publications includemystery seriespersonal experience withprevious works includeprofessional background supportspublication credits includesample chapters and outlinetrade journal appealSENTENCESAs you do not currently accept unagented submissions, I’m writing to ask if you’d like to see a picture book manuscript.Can the market stand one more book on weight control? If it’s thisHOW TO SAY IT® / 293one—written by a physician with thirty years’ success in helping patients lose weight—it can!Enclosed are three sample chapters and an outline.Enclosed is a SASE for your response.I can submit the article by e-mail, on disks, or as hard copy.I could deliver a 5,000-word article by September 1.I look forward to hearing from you.It was a dark and stormy night—or was it?Thank you for your time and consideration.“The Invisible Dragons” is an original Japanese folktale in which two brothers who try to outdo each other are rescued from a predicament of their own making by a girl whose name is too big for her.Whenshouldyou “cry wolf?”PARAGRAPHSFrancesca Lia Block once wrote, “Love is a dangerous angel.” She added, “Especially nowadays.” Would you be interested in seeing an 80,000-word manuscript on the physical, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual dangers of sex today, supported by my current research?A man with amnesia tries to negotiate the tricky steps of the life he is told is his. A familiar plot? Not in this novel.Thank you for sending the submission guidelines forStucco City.Having studied the guidelines and having also been a subscriber to your magazine for more than five years, I believe the article I want to submit to you is as new as it is highly appropriate to your readership.Do you still believe in the existence of high-yield, low-risk stocks? You may not be as naïve as you think.We met at a writers’ conference in Los Angeles last month and briefly discussed the point at which a writer might need an agent. I believe I have reached that point.I’ve been a season ticket-holder for the past three years and have thoroughly enjoyed your theater company’s vitality, intelligence, and creativity. I am also a playwright with a script that I think is particularly appropriate for your ensemble.On November 27, 1910, Marie Marvingt set the first women’s world records in aviation. Earlier that month she had obtained her pilot’s license, the third woman in the world to do so. An outstanding athlete (in 1910 the French government awarded her a gold medal for being expert inallsports), she was also a nurse, inventor, traveler, and the most decorated woman in the world. I would be surprised if your readers had ever heard of her.294 / HOW TO SAY IT®SAMPLE LETTERSDear Ms. Selston,It’s a question we’d all like answered: Is there life after death?In September of 2000 I was pronounced clinically dead. As you might suspect, the diagnosis was correct only up to a point.My experience fed a fierce curiosity to know how “normal” such experiences are. And what they mean. And whether they might be proof of anything.Since that time, I have interviewed 184 people who have also been to the “other side” and returned.Not since Moody’sLife After Lifehas there been such a diverse collection of anecdotal evidence that there is indeed more to life than life.Would you be interested in seeing some or all of this 70,000-word manuscript? Enclosed is a SASE for your reply.Thank you.From: jhall@email.comTo: query@email.comDate: 06/26/2000 01:41 PM MSTSubject: Query: Renting a villa in Sicily Hello. For my third stay in Sicily this fall, I’m renting a villa. Would you be interested in a 1,200-word piece comparing the benefits of villa life with hotel life, using as examples three of my favorite Sicilian hotels (one on the north coast, one on the south coast, and one in Taormina)?Travel information layered into the article includes getting to Sicily; the best times to visit; auto rental peculiarities there; the three best areas in which to rent villas and the daytrips that are possible from each; the sites that no visitor to Sicily should miss.I’ve written eighteen books published by mainstream publishers as well as a number of magazine and other articles. I’ll be in Sicily Oct.13 Nov. 13 and could get the piece to you several weeks after that.Because Sicily is best traveled in spring or fall, the article might appear in the spring for fall travel.Thanks for your time and attention.Dear Randy Shepperton,Would you be interested in seeing an 85,000-word novel,The BoardingHouse?Wealthy, intelligent, and isolated, Marshall is a house divided against himself. Denying important and life-giving facets of his self from an early age, he surrounds himself with shadows formed by his projected unacceptable imaginings. In this literary exploration of the divided self, Marshall struggles to resolve the four basic human conflicts—betweenHOW TO SAY IT® / 295freedom and security, right and wrong, masculinity and femininity, and between love and hate in the parent-child relationship. In daring to love with maturity and without reserve he is finally able to deal with the boarders living in his house and to trade his mask for a real face.I can send the complete manuscript or, if you prefer, sample chapters and a detailed synopsis.I am also the author of a number of short stories, one of which won the Abinger Prize last year, and I was recently awarded a grant by our state arts board based on a sample from this novel.Enclosed is a SASE for your reply.Dear Mr. Windibank,My family and I have just spent two months on a small island with no human company but our own. The strange story of why we went there and what we did while we were there is one that I think would interest your readers.Each one of us—48-year-old husband/father, 49-year-old wife/mother, and 17-, 15-, 12-, and 10-year-old children—had a highly individual reaction to the experience and left the island changed in small and large ways.Would you like to see a 5,000-word article, “Islands Within Islands”?I am an architect with articles published in both professional journals and consumer magazines.Enclosed is a SASE for your response.See also: COVER LETTERS, REPORTS, REQUESTS, SALES.