38References and RecommendationsThe hardest thing is writing a recommendation for someone we know.—KIN HUBBARDA letter of reference vouches for a person’s general character. It tells a third party that the person is a responsible, functioning member of society. A reference is a verification: “Yes, I’ve known this person for some time.”A letter of recommendation is more specific and focuses on the person’s professional qualities. It’s often written by someone who knows the applicant on the one hand and the prospective employer, college, club, or awards committee on the other hand. A recommendation is an endorsement: “Yes, this person would be an excellent candidate for your program.”Letters of recommendation and letters of reference are so closely related that guidelines for writing them are similar.A letter of commendation, written to congratulate a person on an achievement, is a combination of appreciation and congratulations; see the relevant chapters.Letters of Reference and Recommendations Include• applying for club membership (see also ORGANIZATIONS)• asking someone to write a letter on your behalf• credit references (see CREDIT)• recommendations: individuals/ideas/companies/projects/products/services/programs/workshops/new procedures/managerial decisions/ plans of action/public office• references: former employees/students/friends/family members/customers/neighbors/babysitters• refusing to write (see also REFUSALS)• requesting information from a previous employer or from a reference cited by an applicant• thanking someone for writing (see also THANK YOU) 296HOW TO SAY IT® / 297How to Say It• Give the person’s full name at the beginning of your reference or recommendation. Later refer to the person as Ms., Mr., or Dr. plus the last name for the first reference in each paragraph and “she” or “he”after that. Never use the first name alone.• State your connection with the person (former employer, teacher, supervisor, adviser, associate, neighbor, mentor) and how long you’ve known them (“for five years”).• Focus on the person’s character for a general letter of reference (trustworthiness, sense of responsibility, enthusiasm, tact). In a letter of recommendation, focus on job experience and skills (length of employment with you, special abilities and accomplishments, your sense of the person as a prospective employee). Support your statements with facts or examples.• Close with a summary statement reaffirming your recommendation of or confidence in the person.• Offer to provide further information, if appropriate. Include your name, address, and phone number if you are not using letterhead stationery.• Give the reference or recommendation to the subject of the letter, leaving the envelope unsealed so the person can read it if they wish.If you’ve been asked to mail your letter directly to a personnel office, scholarship committee, or other inquiring agency, it is sealed. Occasionally you might be asked to sign your name over the sealed flap to insure confidentiality. Sealed letters are generally more persuasive than unsealed ones.What Not to Say• Don’t use the trite “To whom it may concern” if you can help it. A memo format is appropriate: “To:/From:/Date:/Re:.” Or, give your letter a suitable heading such as “Introducing Letitia Fillimore,” “To: Prospective Employees,” “Recommendation of Helena Landless,”“Letter of Reference for William Einhorn.”• Don’t be too lavish or use too many superlatives—it undermines your credibility. Focus on two or three qualities and give examples of them.• Don’t tell the prospective employer what to do: “I’d hire her in a minute if she were applying here,” “If I were you, I’d snap this one up,” or “I can’t think of anyone more deserving of this scholarship.”Most people resent being told their business. You supply the information; they make the decision.298 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Avoid saying anything you can’t prove. This is often not so much outright dishonesty as misplaced enthusiasm, but it can work to the subject’s disadvantage.Tips on Writing• Be brief. One page, at most two, is sufficient to convey the general picture without repeating yourself, using unnecessary and fulsome phrases, or boring the other person.• Be specific. Don’t tell; show the reader. Instead of saying someone is honest, explain that the person had access to the cash register, and even when experiencing personal financial hardship, turned in accurate receipts. Instead of saying someone is compassionate, tell how they missed a dinner party to help a troubled co-worker.• When applying for a position, don’t send letters of recommendation with your application letter or cover letter and résumé. Wait until they are requested.Special Situations• When you want to list someone as a reference, call or write first and ask their permission.• When asking someone to write a letter of reference or recommendation for you, give the person enough information to be able to emphasize what will be most helpful to you (“I am applying for a position as a claims examiner”). Help the person tailor what they know of you with what you tell them of the company’s needs and requirements.Enclose either a SASE for a return to you or a stamped envelope addressed to the person who is to receive the reference. Express your appreciation. Allow two to three weeks for the person to write the letter.• After thanking someone for writing you a recommendation or reference, share any news of your job search, membership application, or college admission efforts—or at least promise to let the person know what happens. Even if you don’t get the position or choose not to take it, you will want to express your gratitude to the person for writing on your behalf.• When you believe that writing a positive letter of reference or recommendation for a former employee is unjustified or, in some cases, irresponsible, you may decline to provide one. Most employee records are accessible to employees, who may be inspired to legal action if they do not care for what you have written. According to some surveys, many employers are so wary of lawsuits that they don’t give any information on former employees without their written consent andHOW TO SAY IT® / 299indemnification. Some companies will never under any circumstances provide references; defending a defamation suit can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars, even if the company wins. Many companies and personnel departments have a policy of either giving information only over the phone (thus, putting nothing in writing) or sending a form letter that acknowledges that the person worked there and verifies the dates of employment. Such a form might add: “It is against our policy to discuss the performance of former employees.”• When recommending a service or product, relate your own experiences with it, but refrain from giving a blanket endorsement. Provide a few disclaimers: “This is only my opinion, of course”; “You may want to see what others think”; “It may not work for everyone, but we liked it.”• When formally recommending a course of action, a policy change, or a decision, include: a subject line or first sentence stating what the letter is about; a summary of your recommendations; factual support for your recommendations; your offer to accept further negotiation, to engage in further research, or to submit additional information. If your recommendation is critical or negative, word it carefully. Point out the benefits along with the disadvantages, stating that you think the latter outweigh the former.Format• Letters of reference and recommendation are typed on letterhead paper.• Thank-you notes sent to people who have written letters of reference or recommendation are typed or handwritten on plain personal stationery or foldovers.• In-house recommendations dealing with matters of policy are typed on memo paper.WORDSadmirableapprovecapablecommendablecompetentcongenialconscientiousconsideratecooperativecreativedependablediligentdiscreetdynamiceffectiveefficientendorseenergeticethicalexcellentexperiencedfirst-ratehardworkinghonestimaginativeindispensableingeniousinitiativeintegrityintelligentinvaluableinventive300 / HOW TO SAY IT®loyalmeticulousoutstandingpersonablepraiseworthyproductiveprofessionalrecommendreliableremarkableresourcefulrespectresponsibleself-motivatedsensiblesuccessfulsuitabletactfulthoughtfultrustworthyvaluablePHRASESable to energize a group of peopleacquits herself/himself wellasset to any organizationattentive to detailbroad experience/range of skillscan attest tocreative problem-solverdependable/eager/hard workerdid much to improve/increase/discharged his/her duties satisfact-better/upgradeorilydistinguished herself/himself bydo not hesitate to recommendenergetic and enthusiastic workerevery confidence infirst-rate employeefor the past five yearsgives me real satisfaction togreat respect forhappy to write on behalfhas three years’ experiencehave been impressed withheld in high regard hereheld positions of responsibilityhighly developed technical skillsI heartily/wholeheartedly/highlyin response to your request for in-recommendformation aboutmany fine contributionsmatchless recordnothing but praise forone in a thousandoutstanding leadership abilitiesrare findrecommend with complete confid-responsible for all aspects of security encesatisfactory in every wayset great store byskilled in all phrases of light clerical sterling qualitiesdutiestake-charge persontake genuine pleasure in recom-mendingtakes pride in his/her workvouch forHOW TO SAY IT® / 301well thought ofSENTENCESAlthough company policy prohibits my writing you the recommendation you requested, I certainly wish you every success with your career.Ann Shankland has highly developed sales and marketing skills and has also proven herself invaluable in the recruiting, training, and supervising of an effective sales team.Elizabeth Endorfield is one of our most knowledgeable people when it comes to custodial chemicals, equipment, and techniques.Hiram G. Travers was in my employ for ten years.I am proud to recommend Ellen Huntly to you—I always found her work, character, and office manner most satisfactory.In response to your inquiry about Chester Nimmo, it is only fair to say that he seemed to need constant supervision and our association with him was not an altogether happy one.I’ve known Richard Musgrove as a neighbor and employee for six years.I would prefer not to comment on Jean Emerson’s employment with us.Mary Treadwell worked as an X-ray technician at Porter General Hospital from 1995 to 2001.Mr. Tamson’s record with our company was excellent.Thank you for the wonderful and apparently persuasive recommendation you wrote for me—I’ve been accepted at the Maxwell School of Political Science!To evaluate your suitability for the sales position you applied for, we need to speak to at least four former employers or supervisors—please provide names, addresses, and daytime phone numbers of people we may contact.Working with you has meant a great deal to me and I’m wondering if I may give your name as a reference when I apply for my first “real” job.PARAGRAPHSEmily Wardle has asked that I write a letter of recommendation based on our professional association over the past several years. I’ve found Ms. Wardle to be intelligent and trustworthy as well as energetic in carrying out her duties. She is an asset to any organization. I would recommend her without reservation.You asked what I thought of the Vanever-Hartletop contract. After looking into the matter, my best recommendation would be to return302 / HOW TO SAY IT®the contract unsigned with a request for renegotiation of the default clause.In response to your request for information about Tasker Lithography, I must say that we’ve had nothing but exceptionally fine dealings with them for the past eight years. Deadlines were met, and the quality of their work has been superb. The few times we asked for changes, they were carried out quickly and cheerfully. It’s possible that others have had different experiences with Tasker. I can only say that we are pleased with their work.Nancy Lammeter-Cass is being considered for a position as pastry chef in our catering service, and has given your name as a reference. Will you please complete the attached form as soon as possible? Enclosed is a self-addressed stamped envelope for your reply. Thank you.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Ms. Tartan,You once offered to write me a letter of reference if ever I needed one.I would like to take you up on your kind offer now.I am applying for a part-time teaching position in the Glendinning-Melville School District and have been asked to supply several letters of reference. In the hopes that you have the time and are still willing to write a letter, I’m enclosing an instruction sheet from the school district outlining what they need in a letter of reference as well as a stamped envelope addressed to the district personnel offices.If for any reason you cannot do this, I will understand. Know that I am, in any case, grateful for past kindnesses.Sincerely,TO: Office of AdmissionsFROM: Dr. Charles KennedyRE: Steve MonkDATE: November 15, 2002I have known Steve Monk for four years, first as a student in my earth sciences and biology classes and later as Steve’s adviser for an independent study in biology. I am currently helping him with an extracurricular research project.Mr. Monk is one of the brightest, most research-oriented students I have encountered in eighteen years of teaching. His SAT and achievement test scores only begin to tell the story. He has a wonderful understanding of the principles of scientific inquiry, a passion for ex-actitude, and a bottomless curiosity.I am interested in Steve’s situation and will be happy to provide any further information.HOW TO SAY IT® / 303Dear Ms. Burnell,You requested employment information about Dan Burke.Mr. Burke was employed with us from 1996 through 1999 as a structural engineer. His work was satisfactory, and I believe he left us to pursue a more challenging job opportunity.If we can be of additional assistance, please call.Sincerely,See also: APPRECIATION, EMPLOYMENT, INTRODUCTIONS, ORGANIZATIONS, REQUESTS, RESUMES, THANK YOU.