39RefusalsMost people hate to say no—but not nearly as much as other people hate to hearit.—DIANNE BOOHERWhen we have no interest in an activity and also have an iron-clad excuse (being out of the country or out of money, for example), letters of refusal, regret, and rejection are easy to write. In all other cases, they are a challenge.To write letters of refusal (also known as regrets and rejections), be certain that you want to say “no”; ambivalence will weaken your letter.A good reason for saying “no” is simply “I don’t want to.” When you have a specific reason for saying no, you can give it. However, the fact that someone wants you to do something confers no obligation on you to defend your decision. People who become angry with you for saying no, who try to manipulate you, or who make you feel guilty are confusing requests with demands.Write a Refusal When Saying “No” to• adjustment/claims requests• applications: employment/franchise• gifts• invitations: personal/business• proposals: contracts/bids/books• requests: contributions/credit/introductions/time/volunteering/promotions/ raises/loans of money or possessions/appointments/meetings/interviews• sales: presentations/offers/invitations• wedding invitations (see WEDDINGS)How to Say It• Thank the person for the offer, request, invitation (which you describe or mention specifically).304HOW TO SAY IT® / 305• Make a courteous remark, agreeing with the person that the cause is worthy, the proposal well thought-out, the résumé impressive, or the invitation appealing.• Say “no,” expressing your regret at having to do so.• If you wish, explain your position.• Suggest alternate courses of action or other resources, if appropriate.• Close with a pleasant wish to be of more help next time, to see the person again, or for success with their project, job search, or request.What Not to Say• Don’t leave any doubt in the other person’s mind about your response; your “no” is firm and non-negotiable.• Don’t lie. It’s too easy to be tripped up, and you’ll be more comfortable with yourself and with the other person if you ground your refusal in some version of the truth.• Don’t offer lengthy, involved excuses and apologies; they are not persuasive, even when true. “Several excuses are always less convincing than one.” (Aldous Huxley)• Don’t make personal remarks (about their appearance, personality, behavior, language skills) when turning down a person’s request, job application, or proposal. Even if you think it would help the person in the future, leave this kind of comment to someone else in their life.• Don’t reply sarcastically to outrageous or inappropriate requests. It does you no good and angers the other person.Tips on Writing• Respond promptly. “The prompter the refusal, the less the disappointment.” (Publilius Syrus) In addition, most people asking for something or inviting you to an event need to know soon. By giving your refusal early, you allow them time to find another solution or invitee.• Be tactful. Avoid basing your refusal on the other person’s résumé, program, invitation. Phrase it instead in terms of some inability or requirement on your part (“need someone who is bonded”; “another meeting that day”; “will be out of town”; or simply “will be unable to help”).• Give your excuse before your refusal. The reader is thus prepared and the disappointment at your “no” doesn’t keep them from “hearing” your reasons. Instead of saying, “I will not be able to attend your graduation because I’m going to be in California that week,” say, “I am going to be in California the week of June 2, which means I won’t, unfortunately, be able to attend your graduation.”306 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Lessen the disappointment: offer to help at a later date; suggest someone who might be able to provide the same assistance; agree with them on some point; apologize for your inability to approve the request; indicate some benefit to them from your refusal; thank them for their interest/request/concern.• The inimitable Miss Manners (Judith Martin) wouldn’t want you to completely lessen the disappointment, however. She points out that you can’t reject someone without them feeling rejected; if they don’t feel rejected they don’t go away. A painless rejection isn’t one, so don’t give false hope. She advises writing refusals that are bland, routine, and unoriginal.• Occasionally, the way you turn down an applicant, proposal, bid, or other business matter can lead to legal problems. If you have concerns, consult with a lawyer before writing your letter.Special Situations• When unable to attend, always respond with regret to an invitation marked “R.S.V.P.,” “Please reply,” or “Regrets only.” This is mandatory, obligatory, required, compulsory, imperative, and essential. If the invitation is issued in the name of more than one person, mention all of them in your refusal and mail it either to the person listed under the R.S.V.P. or to the first name given. To decline an invitation, use the same format as the invitation itself: If it is handwritten, handwrite your reply. If business letterhead stationery is used, reply on your own business letterhead. When the invitation is worded informally, your reply is also informal. When the invitation is formal, your reply uses the same words, layout, and style as the invitation.• White House invitations include the phone number of the Social Office where you telephone your regrets or ask how to respond to the invitation. General guidelines are: reply within a day of receiving the invitation; write the reply yourself (don’t have a secretary do it); handwrite it on plain or engraved personal stationery; use the same format and person (first person or third person) as the invitation. There are only four generally accepted excuses for not accepting a White House invitation: a death in the family, a family wedding, prior travel plans, illness. Your reply says, “We regret that owing to the illness/recent death of…”• When turning down an applicant for a position, include: your thanks for the person’s application; a simple statement saying that you are unable to offer the person the position; if necessary or helpful, an explanation of the decision; positive comments on the person’s credentials, abilities, interview, résumé; if applicable, an invitation to reapply at some later time; your good wishes for success in the person’s search for a suitable position. Some companies don’t notify a job-seekerHOW TO SAY IT® / 307whose application is unsuccessful. However, it is courteous as well as good public relations to write a brief, tactful letter. When replying to an unsolicited application, express your appreciation for thinking of your company, state that there are no positions open, offer to keep the résumé on file, and invite a later contact, if that is an option.• When you refuse a job offer, do so with thanks and complimentary remarks about the company, your interviewer, the human resources department. Express your regret. If appropriate, tell why you made the choice you did, but phrase it in terms of your needs and not the company’s deficiencies. Close on a positive note that leaves the door open for the future.• When denying a requested promotion or raise or application for an in-house position (1) show appreciation for the employee’s contributions, listing specific talents and strengths; (2) explain honestly and concretely why the request was denied; (3) offer suggestions on how the promotion or raise or other position might be obtained or, if your“no” depended on external factors (too many managers, budget shortfalls), what changes might affect a future request. The goal is to leave the employee feeling valued, motivated, and encouraged.• Refuse an adjustment or claims request in a way that maximizes the chances of keeping the customer. Be tactful and considerate. Offer an alternative or compromise solution when possible. Tell the customer that you understand their position, that their complaint has been given every consideration, and that you wish you could say “yes.” Then give a credible explanation of your “no.” Use facts or copies of documents to show that an adjustment is not warranted. Most customers are satisfied with a brief, clearly written refusal. A few will write back and argue, point by point. When that happens, write a firm “no” with no further explanations.• Many companies and government agencies have codified procedures for handling bids. When you have a choice, notify bidders of your requirements as soon as possible. In rejecting bids, be courteous and supportive, and, when possible, explain briefly why the bid was rejected (especially if it concerned failure to follow directives or to stay within certain guidelines) or why the winning bid was accepted. Information like this is useful to your contractors. Close with an expression of appreciation and a reference to the possibility of doing business with them at a later date. You do not need to name the winning bidder.• When refusing a request for credit or a loan, be tactful; the person is still a customer, a potential customer, or a friend. Thank the person for applying or asking. Express appreciation of the interest in your company or faith in your friendship. In the case of an application for a commercial loan or commercial credit, tell how you arrived at your decision (the application, employer’s recommendation, background check, credit bureau file). Suggest ways of improving an applicant’s credit standing, alternative sources of credit, or re-applying to you308 / HOW TO SAY IT®after a certain period of time or after resolving certain financial problems. In the case of a personal loan, omit the advice and simply state that you’re unable to help at this time.• Most manuscript rejections are made with form postcards or letters. Few are as witty as Samuel Johnson’s: “Your manuscript is both good and original; but the part that is good is not original, and the part that is original is not good.” When you write a personal letter, emphasize that the rejection is based on the needs and interests of your publishing house and that the situation at another publisher might be different. Assure the person that you’ve carefully considered the work, offer thanks for thinking of you, and send your good wishes for success in future endeavors.• Most fundraising appeals are mass-produced and you will not reply if you are uninterested. However, when you receive a personal letter with first-class postage, written over the signature of someone known to you, you might want to respond. Compliment the person on the work the organization is doing, give a plausible excuse for not contributing, and offer good wishes. You don’t have to give any more detail than you choose; a vague statement that you are currently overcommitted elsewhere is fine. If you are refusing because you disagree with the organization’s goals or policies, say so.• When terminating a business relationship, friendship, or dating relationship, aim for a no-fault “divorce”: don’t blame the other person or bring up past grievances. Help the other person save face by taking responsibility for the separation on yourself. Be as honest as is consistent with tact and kindness. Above all, be brief and unequivocal; overexplaining or “keeping your options open” can be fatal if you sincerely want to end the relationship. Conclude with an encouraging, complimentary remark.• Sometimes people are extremely persistent about wanting your company, your time, your money. When refusing their requests, your note is firm, simple, and unequivocal (the moment you waffle, they are back in the door). Give no explanations for your refusal (“I am sorry but I will not be able to” is sufficient). The moment you tell why you’re refusing (“I’m very busy just now”), there will be an immediate response (“It will only take a minute”). When you offer another reason, there will be another rebuttal. Engaging you in wearying debate is part of the strategy; you wouldn’t be the first person to say “yes” just to avoid being harangued. “I’m sorry, but no,” repeated as many times as it takes, is the most effective response.• Sometimes you must refuse a gift—in business, for example, when you are offered an unacceptably expensive gift or the acceptance of gifts isn’t allowed by your organization. Express your gratitude for the person’s thoughtfulness and for the choice of gift. Explain why you must return it (“Employees are prohibited from accepting gifts from suppliers” or “I hope you will understand, but I would feel un-HOW TO SAY IT® / 309comfortable accepting such an expensive gift from a client”). Word your refusal so that it does not imply the person was guilty of poor judgment in offering the gift.Format•Business letters of refusal are typed on letterhead stationery.• Personal letters of refusal are most often handwritten.• Form letters are used for routine refusals.• You may e-mail your rejection of queries, suggestions, or requests that were made by e-mail.WORDSawkwardcontraindicateddeclinedifficultdilemmadoubtfulimpossibleimpracticalobstacleoverextendedoverstockedregretfullyrejectreluctantlyrespondunableunavailableunfeasibleunfortunatelyunlikelyPHRASESafter much discussion/careful eval-although I am sympathetic to youruationproblem/plight/situationalthough the idea is appealingappreciate your asking me/us, butbecause of prior commitmentsbeyond the scope of the presentstudycompany policy prohibits us fromcurrent conditions do not warrantdifficult decisiondisinclined at this timedoesn’t qualify/warrantdon’t have enough informationdue to present budget problemshope this will be of some help eventhoughI appreciate your asking me, butif it were possibleI know how understanding you are,I’m sorry to tell youso I’m sureI must say no toI regret that I cannot acceptit is, unfortunately, out of the ques-it’s a wonderful program, buttion that310 / HOW TO SAY IT®it’s currently impossibleI wish I could say yes, butI would like to help, butmust decline/demur/passup/withdraw from/say no tonormally I would be delighted, butnot a choice I can make right nownot an option at the momentnot currently seekingno, thank younot interested at this timeprevious commitmentsputs me in something of a dilemmaregret to inform youremain unconvinced of the value ofruns counter tosincerely regretsorry about this, butu n a b l e   t o   h e l p / c o m -ply/grant/send/contribute/of-fer/providewe appreciate your interest, butwe find that we cannotwe have concluded with regretwe have now had a chance to reviewyour idea has merit, butSENTENCESAlthough we appreciate your interest in Dempsey Toys, we do not feel that your product is one we could successfully market.Although your entry did not win, we wish you good luck and many future successes.At this time there does not appear to be a position with us that is suited to your admittedly fine qualifications.Fundraising is not one of my talents—is there anything else I could do for the committee?I appreciate your offer but I want to try a few things before I go outside the firm for a solution.I don’t think this will work for us.If you re-read your contract, specifically clause Cl, you will see that we have no legal obligations in this regard.I have taken on more projects than I can comfortably handle.I hope this will help you understand why we are unable to furnish the additional funding you are requesting.I know we’ll be missing a wonderful time.I’m sorry not to be able to give you the reference you requested in your letter of November 3.HOW TO SAY IT® / 311I regret that I’m unable to accept your kind invitation—I will be out of town that evening.I sympathize with your request and wish I could help.It’s possible we would be interested sometime after the first of the year.I wish I could be more helpful, but it’s not possible now.I wish I didn’t have to refuse you, Jerry, but I’m not in a position to make you the loan.May I take a raincheck?Our present schedule is, unfortunately, inflexible.Regarding your request to use my name in your fundraising literature, I must say no.Thank you, but we have had a regular purchasing arrangement with Burnside Office Supplies for many years.The Board has, unfortunately, turned down your request.The position at Locksley International for which you applied has been filled.Unfortunately, this is not a priority for Pettifer Grains at this time.We appreciate your asking us, and hope that we will have the opportunity of saying “yes” some other time.We are unable to approve your loan application at this time.We have decided to accept another proposal.We have reviewed your credit application and regret to inform you that we are unable to offer you a bank card at this time.We regret that your work was not selected for inclusion in the symposium.We regret to inform you that Spenlow Paint & Tile is no longer considering applications for its sales positions.We regret to say that a careful examination of your résumé does not indicate a particular match for our present needs.Your request comes at a particularly difficult time for me—I’m over-scheduled for the next two months.PARAGRAPHSDr. Gerda Torp regrets that because of a previous engagement she is unable to accept the kind invitation of Mr. and Mrs. Esdras B. Longer for Sunday, the third of June, at 8:00 p.m.Thank you for your invitation to join Glowry Health Services as a pharmacy technician. The beautiful new facilities, the friendly staff members, and the good interview I had with you were all very persuasive. However, I have also been offered a position forty-five minutes closer to home. To have more time with my family, I plan to accept it. I312 / HOW TO SAY IT®thank you for your time, attention, and good humor. I hope our paths cross again someday.Because we are financially committed to several charities similar to yours, we are unable to send you anything. However, please accept our best wishes for successful continuation and funding of your work—we certainly appreciate and admire what you’re doing.I’ve checked our production schedule and see no way of moving up your deliveries by two weeks. We are dependent on materials shipped to us by suppliers in other states who are unable to alter their timetables.For a number of reasons, I am uneasy about writing you a letter of introduction to Sir Harrison Peters. I have discussed it with my superior, who would prefer that you find some other avenue of contact. I hope you understand.We’ve just received your kind letter inviting us to Howards End. You can imagine how we’d enjoy seeing you again. However, Julia is graduating from college that weekend, so we have to say no this time.Thanks so much for thinking of us.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Dean Arabin:I regret that I am unable to represent Barchester College at the inaug-uration of Dr. Eleanor Bold as new president of Century College on September 16. I was unable to reschedule a previous commitment for that day.My wife is a graduate of Century, so I would have particularly enjoyed being part of the ceremony. Thank you for thinking of me. I was honored to be asked to represent the College and would be glad to be of service at some other time.I hope you are able to make other arrangements.Sincerely,TO: Friends of the Library CommitteeThank you for your kind letter asking me to direct the annual fundraiser. I am flattered that you thought of me.Because of several other time-consuming commitments, I am unable to accept your invitation. I would have enjoyed working with you and contributing in some way to our fine library system, but I feel sure that you will find the right person for this important project.With best wishes, I amSincerely yours,Dear Tony Cryspyn:Thank you for submitting your work to us. As editors of theWindsorHOW TO SAY IT® / 313Castle Review,we have given your material careful consideration; every manuscript submitted to this office is read by one or more of us.We regret that “The Ninth Son” is not suited to the current needs of the magazine, but we wish to thank you for having given us the opportunity of reading it. Unfortunately, the volume of submissions and the press of other editorial responsibilities do not permit us to make individual comments or suggestions.Sincerely,Dear Margaret Ivory,We have appreciated having you as a patient these last two years. At this time, however, we feel that your best interests are not served by continuing treatment in this office. We would like to recommend that you make an appointment with Dr. Royde-Smith, Dr. Owen, or a dentist of your choice. We will be happy to send along your dental records, including X-rays.Let us know how we can facilitate this change in caregivers.Dear Chris and David,Thank you for sending us the information on your real estate trust investment opportunity.Although it looks appealing, this is not something we are prepared to get into at the moment. I sent the prospectus on to my brother in Denver.It’s possible he would be interested.I’m sure you will find all the capital you need, and I wish you every success.Best wishes,Dear Mrs. Lanier,We at Parker Investment Mortgage, Inc. understand and appreciate how difficult this past year must have been for you.However, given your history of missed payments (June 2001, September 2001, November 2001, and February, March, and April 2002), the fact that your account is now three months past due, and our inability to arrange a meeting with you to discuss solutions, we are unable to grant you any additional time.Unless we receive your unpaid balance by May 15, you will receive a foreclosure notice.Sincerely,See also: APPOINTMENTS, CREDIT, DISAGREEMENT, RESPONSES, SENSITIVE.