41Requests and InquiriesKnow how to ask. There is nothing more difficultfor some people, nor, for others, easier.—BALTASAR GRACIÁNLetters of request (when you want to ask for something) and letters of inquiry (when you want to know something) are critical in maintaining the flow of ideas and resources among individuals and organizations. Because they are often the first contact between businesses and potential customers, between those seeking something and the employers, publishers, and vendors they are seeking it from, these letters must be good ambassadors.Most commonplace requests (to change a life insurance beneficiary, to claim insurance benefits, to apply for a VA loan, to purchase a home, for federal employment) are initiated by a phone call and completed with the appropriate forms. Only in the case of problems are letters required.Write Letters of Request/Inquiry When You Want• adjustments (see COMPLAINTS)• advice (see ADVICE)• appointments/meetings/interviews (see APPLICATIONS, APPOINTMENTS, EMPLOYMENT, RESUMES)• assistance: business/personal• bids and estimates• contributions/donations (see FUNDRAISING)• credit information (see CREDIT)• documents or copies of business/personal records• donation (see FUNDRAISING)• extension of deadline• favors: business/personal• forgiveness (see APOLOGIES)• goods/services: prices/samples/information/brochures/product literature• information/explanations/instructions• introductions (see INTRODUCTIONS)• loan (see CREDIT)321322 / HOW TO SAY IT®• payment (see COLLECTION, CREDIT)• permission to reprint/use copyrighted material• raise in salary (see EMPLOYMENT)• reservation (see TRAVEL)• speakers for your conference/banquet/workshop• to borrow money (see CREDIT)• to check on an unacknowledged gift (see FOLLOW-UP)• to interview for a job (see APPLICATIONS, COVER LETTERS)• to learn if a company has job openings• to query an editor about a book or article idea (see QUERIES)• zoning changesHow to Say It• State clearly and briefly what you’re requesting, beginning with a courtesy phrase like “Please send me…” or “May I please have…”• Give details to help the person send you exactly what you want (reference numbers, dates, descriptions, titles).• If appropriate, and if it will help the person furnish you more precisely with what you need, briefly explain the use you intend to make of the material. (When writing the county pathologist for information on procedures in a murder case, it helps the person to know that you are a mystery writer looking for background rather than a prosecutor building a case or a physician in search of medical details.)• State the specific action or response you want from your reader.• Explain why your reader might want to respond to your request.“The best way to get on in the world is to make people believe it’s to their advantage to help you.” (La Bruyère)• If appropriate, offer to cover costs of photocopying, postage, or fees.• Specify the date by which you need a response.• At the end, if your letter is a long one, restate your request.• Express your thanks or appreciation for the other person’s time and attention and close with a confident statement that the other person will respond positively.• Enclose a self-addressed stamped envelope (SASE), if appropriate.Otherwise, tell where to send the information or where to telephone, fax, or e-mail the response.What Not to Say• Don’t simply request “information.” Be specific. Some companies have hundreds of brochures dealing with their products and services.A vague request for “information” may or may not net you what you need. If you don’t know what other information might beHOW TO SAY IT® / 323available or useful, add, “I would appreciate any other information you think might be helpful.”• Don’t be apologetic (unless your request is time-consuming or difficult to supply). Avoid phrases like “I hope this is not too much trouble” and “I’m sorry to inconvenience you.” Indicate in passing your respect for the other person’s time, talents, and resources (“I know how busy you are”) but don’t dwell on the negative. Everyone has requests, and the more matter-of-fact and courteous you are, the better your chances of getting a positive reply.• Avoid a highhanded approach that implies you are entitled to the information, service, or favor. You are making a request, not a demand.Tips on Writing• Be brief, avoiding unnecessary explanations or asking the same question in two different ways. Reread your letter to see if your questions are easy to answer. Most people sitting at information-supplying desks have too much mail and too little time.• Use a subject line to quickly orient your reader: “Subject: cellular phone service”; “Subject: horse transporting”; “Re: piano tuning rates”;“Subject: airbag safety information”; “Re: mountaineering and ice climbing expeditions in North America”; “Subject: recipes using cranberries.” For simple, businesslike requests, no salutation is necessary; the subject line can stand alone.When you have several requests, number and place each one on a separate line (from most to least important) so that the recipient can tick off each item as it is responded to.• Be precise about the information you want: mailing instructions for the return of a hard drive, how to petition a county court for a legal name change, availability and rates for the high season, absentee figures for the period January 1 to June 30. The more information you give, the more helpful is the information you receive.• Several letterwriting authorities advise not to end a letter of request with “thank you” or “thanking you in advance” (because these expressions seem to signal an end to the exchange), but both have become common and acceptable in current usage. Some people like the brisk wrap-up sound of it and use it automatically. You can also end with“I appreciate your time and attention” or “I look forward to hearing from you.”• Make it easy for someone to respond to you: enclose a survey or questionnaire; provide a postage-paid postcard printed with a message and fill-in blanks; leave space under each question on your letter so the person can jot down replies and return it in the accompanying SASE. When the other person is doing you a favor, and one of you324 / HOW TO SAY IT®must bear the cost of postage, materials, or other assistance, it is, of course, you who should offer to pay. Include a SASE when asking someone to make an effort on your behalf. When requesting information of companies who hope to make a sale to you, this is unnecessary.Special Situations• When writing to ask if an unacknowledged gift was received, describe the item, tell when you sent it, and offer a face-saving excuse for the person (“I know you are especially busy just now”). You might say you’re inquiring because you insured the package and if it did not arrive, you want to follow up on it, or that you are wondering if you should put a “stop” order on the check. You’re not required to give a reason for your inquiry, but doing so is tactful.• When requesting reservations for facilities for conferences, meetings, sales presentations, and other business activities, begin your inquiries with a telephone call to determine rates, date availability, and description of facilities. When writing to confirm your arrangements, include: time, date, number of expected attendees, required equipment and supplies, refreshment arrangements, billing information, name of contact person in your organization (if not you), and any other agreed-upon items.• When requesting a pay raise in writing (as opposed to an interview), begin by identifying your position in the company and the amount of raise you want. List your reasons for thinking a raise is appropriate: longer hours, more responsibility, work successes, noteworthy results, new skills. Whenever possible, use figures (“increase of 10%”). Emphasize the work you’ve done since your last pay raise.It is not productive to point to other people in the department who do less than you and are better compensated. Repeat your strongest argument and close with good wishes and an expression of appreciation.• To request a copy of your military record, write: Personnel Records Officer, National Personnel Records Center, 9700 Page Boulevard, St.Louis, MO 63132-5100. Begin with a subject line that gives your service or social security number. State what you need (“discharge papers”) and, if appropriate, why you need them or no longer have your copy of them. Give your mailing address and daytime phone number.• Your letter requesting a zoning change will become part of the public record, so it must be factual, accurate, unemotional, and businesslike. State your reasons for requesting the change, modification, or variance. Include as much information as you can showing that, first, a zoning change will not harm the environs and, second, that it has potential benefits. Attach statements from neighbors, petitions, assessments, and other documents that bear on the issue.HOW TO SAY IT® / 325• When requesting your physician to release your medical records to another physician, hospital, or insurance company, write: “Dear Dr. [name], I hereby authorize you to release my medical file to [name of recipient]. I will appreciate this being done as soon as possible.Thank you.”• When requesting permission to reprint copyrighted material, make it easy to say “yes.” Include two copies of either a form or your letter so that the person can sign and date them and return one to you.Include a self-addressed stamped envelope. State precisely what you want to use (title of book or article, page numbers, line or paragraph numbers, and a photocopy of the excerpted material). Tell how you plan to use the material (the name of your book or article, approximate publication date, publisher, price, expected number of copies to be printed, whether you want U.S. or world rights, and anything else that describes the anticipated audience and distribution). Include the credit line you will be using, and ask for their approval of it. Express your appreciation for considering the permissions request and, if you wish, your admiration for the person’s work.• When asking someone to speak at your meeting or conference, give the following information: your organization’s name; date, time, and place of the event, with directions or a map; desired length and subject of the talk; the reason or focus for the event; a description of the group’s interests and backgrounds to give the speaker some sense of the audience; an estimate of the size of the audience; your expectations of when the speaker would arrive and depart; whether you are paying a fee and the speaker’s travel expenses and lodgings; what equipment (microphone, overhead projector) is available; the name and phone number of a contact person (if this is not you).• When requesting estimates, bids, proposals, or price quotes, be specific: quantities, deadlines (for bid and for completion of work); special requirements; types, model numbers, colors; a list of everything you expect to be included in the total. To ensure that no important consideration is omitted, use the eventual contract that will be offered as a model for your letter.• To compare different services (office maintenance, lawn care, driving schools, carpet cleaning) send the same letter requesting information to all such services in your area.Format• Business requests that go outside the company are typed, usually on letterhead stationery. Memo paper is used for routine in-house requests.• Personal requests may be typed or handwritten on business or personal stationery. The more personal the request (advice, favors),326 / HOW TO SAY IT®the more suitable it is to handwrite the note on a foldover or personal stationery.• Postcards are useful for one-line requests.• If you make the same type of request repeatedly, use a form letter or memo paper with blank space to fill in the title of the article or sample you’re requesting.• E-mail is often used to make requests of companies with websites and can be used for some casual or routine requests.WORDSappealassistancebrochuresexpeditefavorfurnishgenerousgrantgratefulimmediatelyinformationinquiryinstructionsproductspromptproblemqueryquestionquestionnairequicklyreferrequirerushreconsiderseeksoliciturgentPHRASESadditional information/timeanswer the following questionsanticipate a favorable responseapply/ask forappreciate any information/youras soon as possiblecooperation/your helpby return mailcount on/upondirect me to the appropriate agencyhave the goodness tohope you are able toI’d appreciate having/receiving/ob-tainingif you can find time in your busyif you think it might be possibleschedule toI’m writing to ask youinstitute inquiriesinterested in receiving informa-it would be most helpfultion/learning more aboutI would appreciate your assessmentI would be grateful/most gratefulOfif/forlook forward to hearing from youoffer some assistanceof great help to uson account of/behalf ofHOW TO SAY IT® / 327please call me to discussplease let me have your estimate byplease provide us with/send detailsplease reply byaboutreply by return mailrespectfully requesttake into considerationthank you for your efforts in/totrouble you to/forwe would appreciate your taking afew minutes towould you be willing to/goodyour considered opinionenough toSENTENCESCan you tell me which government agency might be able to give me background information on Minamata disease in Japan?Do you remember that you once offered to lend me Grandma’s pearl ring for a special occasion?Enclosed is a self-addressed stamped envelope/an International Reply Coupon for your reply.How can a private citizen be named to the task force on the Resolution Trust Corporation?I am preparing a report for which I need annualized total returns for one, three, and five years through December 31—can you provide these by March 15?I’d like to know how one goes about getting on your talk show.I have a favor to ask you, but I take “no” very well!I’m wondering if you have the time to give us a little guidance.Is it true that it’s possible to have stars named for people and, if so, how does one go about it?I would be interested in seeing some of the material that went into the preparation of your most recent occupational titles handbook.May I use your name as a reference when applying for a cashier position with Mawson’s Country Inn?Please forward this letter to the appropriate person.Please send me any literature you have on antioxidant vitamins.This is a formal request to you to make some other arrangements for your cats; your lease clearly states that animals are not allowed in the building.We are contacting several industrial window cleaning firms to invite estimates.328 / HOW TO SAY IT®We do not understand footnote (b) of Exhibit H—could you please explain it?Will you please send me a copy of your current foam and sponge rubber products catalog along with information on bulk order discounts?Will you please send me a list of those trash haulers in Willard County that contract by volume rather than by flat fee?Your order forms, prices, and ordering instructions are oriented toward institutions—can you tell me how an individual can obtain your materials?PARAGRAPHSThe flyer that came with this month’s telephone bill describes a telephone answering system that is available for $8.95 per month. It is not clear to me whether this is an outright purchase (if so, how many months of payment are involved?) or a lease arrangement. Please send me complete information.The Pallant County Arts Board is attempting to determine whether it is meeting the needs of county artists, writers, playwrights, and musicians. Would you be so kind as to take a few minutes to fill out the enclosed questionnaire and return it to us in the self-addressed, stamped envelope? Please do not fold the questionnaire as results will be tabulated by computer.I was unable to attend your talk on “Texture Performance of Metals”but would greatly appreciate reprints or preprints of anything you have written in this area. Thanks.Will you please place my name on your mailing list to receive all announcements, newsletters, and information regarding business mailing regulations and tips? If you have booklets or materials of general interest, I would appreciate copies. Let me know if there is a charge. Thank you.I’m wondering if you could give me about five minutes of your time on the phone some time next week. I am writing a research paper on global economics, and think that you may have answers to some of my questions. I found when I interviewed other people that it takes from three to five minutes—no more. If you are unable to do this, I will understand. Enclosed is a self-addressed postcard—please indicate on it a time when I could call you.I understand that the basement meeting room of the Oakdale Community Church is available for use by various small groups. Would it be possible for our study group to meet there one evening a month? Our own church does not have any such facilities, and we have found it difficult to move around to a different home each month. We could meet on nearly any Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday evening that is convenient for you.We have just moved to the area and are interested in changing fromHOW TO SAY IT® / 329our out-of-state insurance agent to someone local. Please send complete information for the following types of insurance: auto, home, whole life.We prefer that you do not follow up with a call or visit; as soon as we have studied the material, we will call you if we have questions or if we would like to schedule a meeting. Thank you.I respectfully request to be excused from jury duty beginning Nov. 2.I am a veterinarian in a two-person practice. My partner will be in India (copies of airline tickets are attached) the entire month of November.The clinic would effectively be without a veterinarian, and I do not see how we could arrange for adequate care of our many patients during that time.I will be calling on barbers in your area the week of June 4—June 11to show a line of completely new Swedish barbering tools. Made of tempered steel, guaranteed for twenty years, and sold with a service contract at no extra cost, these implements have already won three first-place Mentions of Merit from the American Academy of Barbers. I would like to stop by The Hair Bear sometime during that week. Enclosed is a self-addressed, stamped postcard—please indicate a time that would be convenient for you. To thank you for your time, I will be bringing you a gift.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Axel,I plan to be on Sanburan Island in the near future, and am wondering if you could schedule a tour for me of the Tropical Belt Coal Company.Coal is one of my hobbies.Enclosed is a self-addressed envelope and an International Reply Coupon for your response.Thanks so much for your time and attention.Sincerely,Dear Mr. Babington:I would like your permission to reprint the following material from your book,Diplomacy Today:page iv: paragraph 2: “Since 1701…and nothing was said.”page 294: final sentence: “If it appears that…only Henry VIII knows the truth.”This material would be used in my book,The New Diplomacy,to be published by Baines-Gandish in 2003. The book will retail for $16.95 and is expected to have a somewhat limited market. I will send you a complimentary copy, and you would of course be given credit as follows:330 / HOW TO SAY IT®Diplomacy Today(New York: Goddard Publishing, 1982), pp. iv, 294.Reprinted with permission from Spencer Babington.I’m enclosing two copies of this letter. If you agree to grant me permission, please write “permission granted,” sign and date one of the copies, and return it to me in the enclosed self-addressed stamped envelope.I would appreciate being able to use those two excerpts. Your book was an eye-opener when it appeared, and it has remained a standard for me of fine writing, clear thinking, and inspired research.Sincerely,TO: Emmerick Demolition and SalvageIn September 2001 you submitted a bid to Brooker Real Estate to remove two structures, one at 1898 Stratfield and one at 1921 Cabell. Since that bid, two additional properties have been purchased by Brooker Real Estate that will require demolition this summer.I invite you to submit a rebid to include the two additional sites plus tank removal at another site (please see attachment for description and addresses of sites).Contact me if you will be submitting a bid as I would like to schedule a meeting to discuss this project further and to answer your questions.Dear Morris,I’m thinking of leaving Langdon Glass Works (I’ll tell you why next time I see you) and am currently on the lookout for a good sales management position.You seem to know everyone in the industry (and everybody knows you)—would you mind letting me know if you hear of any openings?I appreciate being able to ask you this. Let’s get together soon.Sincerely,TO: LeRoy Investment ServicesPlease send me information on investment opportunities for the small, independent investor. I would specifically like to know: 1. Requirements, interest rates, and other information on certificates of deposit, treasury bills, municipal bonds, mutual funds, and other investment programs.2. The commission your company charges for handling such investments.3. The performance records on your investment programs over the past two years.4. The names of several people who have used your services recently.TO: Zoning CommissionFROM: Barbara TophamDATE: March 10, 2002HOW TO SAY IT® / 331RE: Zoning File 9117, Children’s Playschool I am writing to urge you to approve the Special Condition Use Permit sought by Children’s Playschool. As we live directly across the street, we would be one of those most affected, and I believe it is important for you to know that the change would not appear to adversely affect the neighborhood.Dear Archie,At the last meeting of the Open Door organizing committee, we discussed the need for new members. Your name came up several times as someone who has spent a good deal of time, money, and energy at the Food Shelf. We all felt you could add creativity, excitement, and inspiration to our efforts.Would you consider a one-year commitment to the committee? This would involve one general monthly meeting, one weekly subcommittee meeting, some telephone work, and your regular weekly volunteer hours.I think you are currently spending about ten hours a week at the center.If you need to cut down on those hours to devote time to the committee, that would be fine.Although this is something you’ll need to think about, we are hoping to have your answer within the next two weeks so that we can publish the new roster in our year-end appeals. We are all hoping that you’ll say“yes” but will understand if you cannot. In any case, we are grateful for the time and talent you have already given the center.With best wishes,TO: Metropolitan CouncilI understand that you are funding a special multi-family recycling program for those who live in apartments or condominiums with twenty or more units.I am writing on behalf of our neighborhood association, as we have a number of such buildings, and residents are interested in such a program.Please send information. We would also be interested in having someone from the Council speak at one of our meetings to explain the program.Sincerely,See also: APPOINTMENTS, COLLECTION, CREDIT, EMPLOYMENT, FUNDRAISING, INTRODUCTIONS, INVITATIONS, ORDERS, RESPONSES, SALES, THANK YOU, TRAVEL.