42ResponsesI was gratified to be able to answer promptly. I said I didn’t know.—MARK TWAINPrompt and thoughtful responses to incoming mail may be as important to your business as your carefully drafted sales letters. They are equally rewarding in your personal life. “A prompt response is a sign of vigorous and authentic concern; nothing could be more flattering or touching to the recipient.” (Jennifer Williams)When responding with a straightforward “yes” or “no,” see ACCEPTANCES or REFUSALS.Write Responses to• announcements• apologies• complaints (see ADJUSTMENTS, APOLOGIES)• congratulations• expressions of sympathy• gifts and kindnesses (see also THANK YOU)• inquiries• invitations (see also ACCEPTANCES, REFUSALS)• letters addressed to someone temporarily absent• requests: information/instructions/samples/introductions/ contributions/payments/letters of referenceHow to Say It• In the first sentence, state what you are responding to (a letter, invitation, memo) so the other person knows immediately why you’re writing. In some cases, use a reference line (“Re: Order # 2K881”).• Briefly give all requested information.• When you cannot respond completely to a request, include names, addresses, and phone numbers where more information can be obtained.332HOW TO SAY IT® / 333• If immediate action is not possible, tell what is being done and by what date results can be expected.• If appropriate, offer further assistance.• Let the other person know you appreciate them and are pleased to be responding.• Close with good wishes, an expression of confidence in your product or service, or a remark about future contacts.What Not to Say• Don’t give more information than your reader requested. In most cases, this is unnecessary and unhelpful.• Don’t misspell the other person’s name. It is immediately noticed and weakens the effect of your response.• Don’t allow an irritated tone to creep in, even when you consider the letter you’re responding to offensive, uninformed, or inane.Tips on Writing• Respond promptly. “It should be the aim of every business office to answer all its mail the same day it is received.” (Alexander L. Sheff and Edna Ingalls) That advice, written in 1942, may be an impossibility today, but it is still a good goal.• When responding to a number of questions or to a complicated letter, organize your letter elements by using numbers, bullets, or asterisks and leave plenty of white space.Special Situations• Customer inquiries provide an unparalleled opportunity to promote your goods and services as well as your company. Handle them with the utmost respect, speed, efficiency, and good cheer—inquiries are generally forerunners of sales. Answer questions as completely as possible and enclose supplementary lists, articles, reports, brochures, flyers, or catalogs. Make it easy for the customer to follow up (place an order, find a local distributor, call a toll-free number).• When responding to a job offer, express pleasure in your future association with the company; say something complimentary about the job interview and interviewer; restate, when appropriate, the conditions of employment; renew your confidence that you and the company are a good match; thank the person. Sometimes your response is a qualified one; you want the position but cannot accept some condition of employment (hours, salary, vacation time). Explain that they334 / HOW TO SAY IT®are your first choice except for that issue; can anything be done about it?• Response to an invitation marked “R.S.V.P.” or “Please reply” is mandatory, obligatory, required, compulsory, imperative, and essential. If you do not plan to attend, the same is true for “Regrets only.”If your invitation includes no R.S.V.P., no “Regrets only,” and no reply card, you need not respond. This type of invitation is used for large affairs—political gatherings, fundraising events, business cocktail parties, conventions. Guidelines for responding to an invitation: Reply within several days of receiving it. State clearly that you will or will not be able to attend. Mirror the invitation, using the same format, and almost all the same words. If you have cards with your name or personalized stationery, you can simply write under your name “accepts with pleasure the kind invitation of…” and repeat the kind of event, time, date, and place.• Invitations (wedding, bar mitzvah, bat mitzvah) and announcements (engagement, graduation, birth, adoption) require a response (letter or congratulatory card with handwritten note), but if you don’t attend the event or celebration you aren’t expected to send a gift.• Expressions of condolence require a response, which can take a number of forms, from handwritten formal notes of thanks (see THANK YOU) to printed newspaper announcements of appreciation (see ANNOUNCEMENTS). In the case of a public figure, printed acknowledgments can be sent to large numbers of people who were not personally known to the family (see ACKNOWLEDGMENTS). Responses may be brief, may be sent up to six weeks following the funeral, and may be written by someone on behalf of the person closest to the deceased.• Responding to fundraising appeals does not often involve a letter, or even a comment from you; most organizations simply want your check, which you tuck into the provided envelope. If you write a letter, mention the sum you’re donating, ask for a receipt (for tax purposes) if you wish, and attach a completed matching gift form if your employer participates in this program. If you are not familiar with the sponsoring organization, you can obtain (free) up to three reports on individual agencies by writing: National Charities Information Bureau, 19 Union Square West, New York, NYC 10003-3395. Enclose a # 10self-addressed stamped envelope as it’s a nonprofit organization. You can also visit them online at www.give.org.• Respond to an apology if only to acknowledge that you received it. What you do after that is your choice. “The person who can meet an apology more than halfway and forgive with a graciousness that makes the aggressor feel almost glad that the trouble occurred, but very certain that it shall never occur again, is the one who will make beautiful and lifelong friendships.” (Julia W. Wolfe)• Birth and adoption announcements are responded to with cardsHOW TO SAY IT® / 335or letters of congratulations. When writing about a child born with defects or a disability, avoid inappropriate or overly sympathetic remarks. Although this situation can entail difficulties and grief, it does not call for a sympathy letter. Until you know how the parents are feeling (devastated, concerned but basically optimistic, happy to have the child), do not reveal your own feelings—they may be wide of the mark. Do not write: “You’re not going to keep it, are you?” “I think you should sue the hospital.” “Is one of you a carrier for this?” “Maybe the baby won’t live; that would be best all around.” “Whose fault was it?” “Did you drink while you were pregnant?” “I guess it could have been worse.” “God only sends burdens to those who can bear them.”Instead, say that you’ve heard that they have a new little one and that you’re thinking of them. You may want to avoid commercial “new baby” cards. Later, when you know how the parents are feeling, you can respond on a more emotional level.• In responding to flattering and enthusiastic congratulatory messages, say “thank you” first of all. Then be gracious. “A compliment is a gift, not to be thrown away carelessly unless you want to hurt the giver.” (Eleanor Hamilton) Reflect the compliment back to the giver (“how nice of you to write,” “your letter touched me,” “how thoughtful of you”).• When asked what you or someone close to you would like for a graduation, anniversary, birthday, or holiday gift, mention a broad gift category (“books,” for example, but not “money”) that will provide a range of prices for the giver.Format• Choosing a format for a letter or note of response is simple: do as you were done unto. If the original letter was typed, type yours; if it was handwritten, handwrite yours. If the invitation was formal, your response should be written in the third-person formal manner. If it was informal, first-person style on personal stationery, you respond similarly.• If you use formal notes engraved or printed with your name, respond to invitations by penning in “accepts with pleasure” or “declines with regret” under your name. Add the date so that your recipient knows which invitation you’re responding to.• Forms are useful in responding to routine inquiries. Requests for information, materials, or samples can be handled with a printed card saying, “This comes to you at your request” or “Thank you for your inquiry. Enclosed are informational materials.” Or, design a brief, general form letter that thanks the person for the inquiry and indicates what information is being forwarded. Include a checklist of publications so you can indicate those that you are enclosing or mailing under336 / HOW TO SAY IT®separate cover. You can also leave blanks: “Thank you for your inquiry about ____.” Or design a form with every conceivable response and then check off the appropriate one (“Your order has been sent.” “We are temporarily out of stock.” “Please reorder in ___ days.” “This is a prepaid item, and your payment has not yet been received.” “Please indicate a second color choice.”).• Reply to an e-mail message with an e-mail. When letterwriters give an e-mail address in their letters, you may respond that way if your response is brief or routine.WORDSacknowledgeappreciateconfirmenclosedfeedbackgratefulinformnotifyregardingrespondreturnsendPHRASESaccording to your letterappreciate your businessappreciate your calling our attentionas mentioned in your lettertodelighted to receiveenclosed you will findfor further informationhappy to hear from youI’m sending youin response to your letter ofmeant a great deal to mepleased to be able to send youthank you for your letter telling usto let you knowaboutunder separate coverwant to reply to your letterwe appreciate your interest inwe have carefully/thoughtfullyconsidered your letteryour sympathetic/delightful/help-ful/comforting/encouraging let-ter/noteSENTENCESAs requested, we are submitting a budget figure for construction surveillance for the water and sewer line project.HOW TO SAY IT® / 337Here is the information you requested about the tank closure.I have received your apology, and hope you will not give the matter another thought.I hope this information is useful to you in resolving any remaining title issues.In response to your request for sealed bids, a bid from Dale Heating and Plumbing is enclosed.Letters like yours have been a great comfort to us all.Mary Postgate has asked me to respond to your letter about the settlement agreement dated January 30.Thank you for sharing with me the lovely memories you have of Father.Thank you for taking the time to write, and please excuse my delay in responding to your letter.Thank you so much for your kind words/for your letter.This is to let you know that the report you requested will be mailed as soon as it is completed (Dec. 3).We are pleased to send you the enclosed information about Weycock United Sugar Company.We thank you for your inquiry, and are pleased to enclose a sample snack bar.You have asked me to estimate the fees that would be required for our services.PARAGRAPHSYour book proposal has been read with great interest. We will want to have several other people read and evaluate it before submitting it for discussion at our weekly acquisition meeting. I will let you know as soon as we have made a decision.Thank you for your inquiry about Gabbadeo Wines. Enclosed are several brochures describing our vineyards and products and a list of vendors in your area.In response to your fax of June 3, I’m sending the three original contracts along with two copies of each, four pro forma invoices with two copies of each, and a bill of lading. Please let us know at once if everything is in order.We received your impressive résumé today and look forward to meeting with you. Because of the large number of responses we received to our advertisement, however, it may be two or three weeks before you hear from us.Thank you for your generous and sincere apology. I am entirely willing338 / HOW TO SAY IT®to put the incident behind me, and I look forward to continuing our old association.In response to your letter of September 16, we have made a number of inquiries and are pleased to tell you that most of the staff here is agreeable to helping you with your research project. Please telephone the department secretary Arthur Eden to let him know what day or days you would like to spend with us.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Ms. Stedman:Thank you for your interest in our Quick Mail program. Due to an overwhelming demand, requests for our brochure and video cassette have far outpaced our supplies. However, a new shipment has been ordered, and we’ll send you your materials as soon as we receive them.Once you receive our kit, you’ll learn all about the money-saving ideas that our program has to offer—reducing your mail float time, accelerating your cash flow, escalating your postage discounts, and still other techniques.We’ll look forward to hearing from you after you have had a chance to look over the materials.Sincerely,Dear Mr. Einhorn:In response to your inquiry of December 3, I am sorry to tell you that Mr. Belton was with us for only a short time and our records do not indicate a forwarding address. I believe he used to also work for Lorraine Linens. You might try them.Dear Barbara and Garnet,Your love and support these past few weeks have been a great comfort to all of us. I am especially grateful for the way you took over with the children when I couldn’t. And, Garnet, thank you for being a pallbearer.I know Edward would have wanted you there. I hope you have not exhausted your reserves of friendship, because I feel I am going to need your kindness and understanding for a while yet.With love and gratitude,Dear Louisa William,I was delighted to receive and read your letter of August 3, 2005. Thank you for your kind remarks about the Alconleigh Suites and the excellent team that operates the hotel.Louisa Kroesig, Sales and Catering Manager, is honored to receive this recognition for her staff. In addition, Christian Talbot, GeneralHOW TO SAY IT® / 339Manager, on behalf of the entire hotel team, is pleased with your compliments about our meeting and exceeding the expectations of the Jassy/Radlett wedding group.Thank you for allowing us to be your hotel of choice—both for hotel accommodations and for your wedding reception—and for providing us with the privilege of introducing our brand of hospitality to your guests from across the United States.We look forward to being of service in the future and feel privileged to have earned your continued business.Thanks again for sharing your satisfaction with us.See also: ACCEPTANCES, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ADJUSTMENTS, APOLOGIES, COVER LETTERS, FAMILY, FOLLOW-UP, GOODWILL, REFUSALS, SENSITIVE, THANK YOU.