44Sales LettersThe advertisement is one of the most interesting and difficultof modern literary forms.—ALDOUS HUXLEYAlmost every letter sent by a company, business, or organization is a sales letter. Even nonbusiness letters like sympathy notes, congratulations, thank-you letters, or apologies carry a second-level message that asks the recipient to think well of the firm. Courtesy, clarity, correctness, and persuasiveness are found in letters sent by successful companies.Although computerized mailing lists have considerably reduced direct mail marketing costs, only about five out of every one hundred mailings are opened by the recipient. This has two implications: you use the envelope itself to entice the person to open it; you make those five opened letters so appealing that you obtain more than the average three out of five responses.Sales letters aren’t appropriate for all products and services, but they can get the reader to make the call or visit the store where the real selling can be done. Because they’re effective and economical (compared to print and video advertising, for example), they’re an integral part of most firms’ marketing strategies. For many small businesses, they are the only affordable advertising tool.Sales letters have become so sophisticated that many businesses no longer generate their own. The buzzword is “integration”—using full-service agencies to handle every aspect of advertising, including sales letters. Find such firms in the Yellow Pages under Direct Marketing, Advertising Agencies, or Public Relations Counselors.Kinds of Sales Letters• announcements: changes/new products• bull; asking for meeting/appointment (see APPOINTMENTS)• bull; congratulations: purchase/new account/payment• bull; direct mail advertising• bull; follow-up: inquiries/sales letters/sales• bull; form letters• bull; goodwill (see GOODWILL)359360 / HOW TO SAY IT®• bull; introducing new products/services• bull; invitation: open house/sale/membership/new account• bull; questionnaires/surveys• bull; responding to inquiries• bull; special promotions/sales/gifts/free services• bull; thank you: sale/new account/revived account• bull; trial offers: products/programs/services/subscriptionsHow to Say It• Get the reader’s attention with your opening sentence, question, anecdote, or statistic.• Create an interest in what you’re selling with a strong central sales message.• Arouse the reader’s desire for your product by using specific, vivid words as well as active power verbs. One word that never gets old is “new.”• Point out how your service or product differs from similar ones, emphasizing quality and dependability.• Convince the reader that responding to your offer is a smart move, and offer “proof” (samples, testimonials, statistics).• Tell how to obtain your product or service.• Give a reason for acting immediately: limited supply, expiring sale offer, future price increase, early-response discount.• State clearly what immediate action you want them to take: “Telephone now for an appointment”; “Order one for every family member”; “Call today to arrange a demonstration”; “Return the postage-paid reply card now”; “Send for your free copy of the planning guide.”• Close the sales letter by inciting readers to immediate action and telling them what you want them to do (order, call, mail a card, come to the store). Give them a good reason for acting right now: limited supplies, expiration date of sale offer, prices going up later, early-response discount. Make it convenient to respond: order blanks with postage-paid reply envelopes, prepaid form postcards asking for a sales rep to call or for additional information, a toll-free number to call for local distributors or to place orders, order now-pay later procedures, listing of store hours and locations. (Business reply mail, with the seller paying the postage, has a 10 to 20 percent higher response rate than courtesy reply, where the buyer pays the postage.)• Finally, echo your letter opening in some way. If you began by quoting a celebrity, finish by saying something like, “And that’s why So-and-So won’t drive anything but a…”• Add a P.S. to repeat your main point, to emphasize an important feature, or to offer a new and strong sales point such as a money-HOW TO SAY IT® / 361back guarantee, a time limit for the offer, an additional bonus for buying now: “P.S. To offer you these sale prices, we must receive your order by June 30”; “P.S. Don’t forget—your fee includes a gift!”;“P.S. If you are not completely satisfied, return your Roebel Pager and we will cheerfully issue you a full refund.” Lin Yutan wrote, “A letter is a soliloquy, but a letter with a postscript is a conversation.”What Not to Say• Don’t make too many points in one letter. Concentrate on your strongest one or two sales points, add one in the postscript if you like, and save the others for follow-up letters.• Don’t, in general, use numerous exclamation marks or exaggerated adjectives such as astonishing, revolutionary, incredible, sensational, extraordinary, spectacular. Describe instead concrete features, benefits, details, and product claims.• Don’t ask questions relating to the sale (“Can you afford to throw this letter away?” “Can anyone today get along without one?”). It’s poor psychology to enlist readers in a dialogue in which they might not answer your question “correctly.” Questions derail your reader from the one-way train of thought that leads to a sale and bring to full consciousness the idea of refusal.• Don’t say, “We never hold a sale! Our everyday prices are so low we don’t need to.” Human nature likes a sale. Even customers who regularly use your products or services and think they’re reasonably priced are attracted by a bargain. By offering occasional discounts, sales, clearances, and special purchase promotions, you’ll create a sense of excitement and willingness to buy in both old and new customers.• Avoid jargon unless you’re sure that your target audience is familiar with it.• Don’t threaten (“You’ll be sorry if you don’t order now”). It is offputting and it tempts people to call your bluff. However, telling customers that their names will be removed from the mailing list if they don’t order soon is sometimes effective because people fear missing out on something.• Don’t preach, scold, correct, or write down to customers (“you probably don’t know this, but…”). Have others read your letter to be sure no patronizing tone has crept in.• Avoid the first-name, pseudo-friend approach. Business columnist Louis Rukeyser received an impressive reader response after a column on form sales letters. According to him, “The artificially intimate stuff appears particularly irritating.”• Don’t make assumptions: that your reader knows what you are talking about, is familiar with an industry term, can picture your362 / HOW TO SAY IT®product, agrees with your premises. Dale Carnegie wrote, “I deal with the obvious. I present, reiterate and glorify the obvious—because the obvious is what people need to be told.”Tips on Writing• Whether you’re selling a product, service, idea, space, credit, or goodwill, the sales letter requires more work before you write than it does to actually write it. You need to know everything about your product or service. You need to know your reader, assembling as much data as possible. “Knowing something about your customer is just as important as knowing everything about your product.” (Harvey Mackay) Pinpoint and develop a strong central selling point. Consider other factors (timing, design, length, developing a coupon or sample).Only after adequate preparation is a successful letter written.• Everyone agrees on the best way to begin a sales letter: with a bang! There’s no agreement, however, on the type of “bang.” Possibilities include: a surprising fact or statistic; a touching or dramatic anecdote; a personal story; significant savings; the offer of a gift, coupon, or booklet; a thought-provoking question or quotation; a joke or riddle; a celebrity endorsement, quote, or tie-in; a who-what-when-where-why paragraph; your strongest selling factor; a reference to something you have in common or to a previous contact or purchase; telling readers in a convincing way that they are special; asking or offering a favor; perhaps even a negative or unexpected statement.• It’s hard to distinguish between the clever gimmick, hook, or attention-getter and the too-cute-for-its-own-good approach. When taking a risk with a novel overture, ask others to evaluate your letter.If it’s clever, the rewards are great. If you stray on the side of coy or insensitive, the results can be fatal.• State the cost of your product or service. Customers ignore sales messages without prices, assuming they can’t afford the item. Cost determines most purchases, and if the customer has to call to find out what it is, the extra trouble is often not worth it when a competitor’s cost is available in its sales message.• Although both are necessary, emotional appeals tend to outpull intellectual appeals. Tie your message to some basic human emotion: love (“your child will have hours of fun!”); the need for love (“heads will turn when you wear this”); prestige (“your home will be a standout with…“); ambition (“learn new management techniques overnight”); security (“smoke-alarm with built-in battery tester”).Show how your service or product will bring the customer better health, popularity, pride of ownership or accomplishment, success, more money, improved appearance, more comfort and leisure, social and business advancement, loyalty.HOW TO SAY IT® / 363• From start to finish, the focus of a sales letter is on the prospective customer. Use the words “you” and “your” frequently, and describe the product in terms of benefits to the customers: how it relates to their needs, problems, and interests; how it can improve their lives, save them money, and make them feel more confident. The customer has only one question: “What will this do for me?” Persuade potential buyers that they need your product not so much because it’s a great product, but because it is great forthem.• Choose a consistent “voice” that complements your product or service and maintain it throughout your letter: friendly, neighbor-to-neighbor; serious and intellectual; humorous, lively, and fast-moving; brisk and businesslike; urgent and hard-hitting; sophisticated; soothing and reassuring; mysterious; technical or informational; emotional.• Use colorful descriptive words, strong verbs, appealing images.Sometimes sales letterwriters are so intent on either educating the prospective customer or building up a case with statistics, background information, and reports that they forget how boring and how un-client-centered such a message is.• Use repetition to emphasize a main point, clarify complicated material, and lend an attractive rhythm to your letter.• Sales messages can mimic other familiar letters: letters of congratulations, thank-you letters, announcements, invitations, letters of welcome, holiday greetings.• Create and foster credibility by means of testimonials, case histories, research studies, statistics, company reputation, product usage test results, comparison with similar products, free samples or trial periods, guaranties/warranties, celebrity endorsements, photographs of actual use, user polls. Whenever possible, guarantee the buyer’s satisfaction in some way.• How long should a sales letter be? The key is that each word does its job, each word sells. A poorly written letter is in no way redeemed by being short, and some well-written long letters have enjoyed a high response rate. In general, however, shorter letters are better letters.Concentrate on what absolutely needs to be said—whether that takes one page, two, four, or ten. What needs to be kept short in any case are your paragraphs.• To increase the desirability of responding, offer discounts, bargain prices, special offers, delayed no-interest payments, gifts, in-store certificates, enclosures, coupons, brochures, samples, or trial period.• Attention-getting devices make your message more memorable: a message on the envelope that inspires the person to open it (studies show that mailers have about fifteen seconds to get customers to open the envelope or they lose them); handwriting part of the message (the P.S., for example); underlining certain words to look as though you personally emphasized the important points; yellow highlighting of key phrases; colored inks and papers; graphics; questionnaire or survey364 / HOW TO SAY IT®format; boxed information; italics, capital letters, quotation marks, unusual type faces; design elements such as heads, subheads, white space, short paragraphs, indented material, and bulleted lists. Attention-getting devices are not always appropriate; to sell bank cards, life insurance, healthcare services, or other sedate products and services, you want a more traditional format.• For more detailed advice on sales letters, see the excellentSalesLetters That Sizzle: All the Hooks, Lines, and Sinkers You’ll Ever Need toClose Sales,2nd ed., by Herschell Gordon Lewis (Chicago: NTC Business Books, 1999).Special Situations• When responding to customer inquiries, the cover letter is a sales letter of the most potentially effective type because you’ve been given a focused opportunity to sell your product or service. Although the enclosure should sell itself (or the product it describes), the cover letter offers a strong sales message and additional incentives.• A series of letters is often effective. When a segment of the market is susceptible to your product (because of previous purchases, for example), contact them several times—but with a different focus each time: a new premium, an additional benefit of your product or service, time growing short with the offer expiring soon, two-for-one price, discount. Or, target customers buying one of your products with a sales letter promoting another product or service that, out of long habit, they don’t “see” anymore. For example, customers who regularly use a hair salon may forget that they can also buy an extensive line of hair-care products, use tanning booths, or schedule manicures.• With a versatile product or service (or a number of different products in your line), you can reach different target audiences with letters tailored to their needs. A greenhouse manufacturer might write different sales letters to farmers, suburban homeowners, businesses, apartment dwellers, and even college students (the desktop miniature greenhouse).• Sales letters aimed at former customers emphasize your appreciation for past business, your desire to serve them again, products or services introduced since your last contact with them, your confidence that you can satisfy their needs. You could ask if there is a reason that they no longer bring their business to you. This may provide you with useful information. Or it may remind the customer that there is no particular reason.HOW TO SAY IT® / 365Format• Most sales letters are computer-generated—either standard form letters or letters in which names, addresses, and salutations are personalized using a mass mail merge feature. The latter gives form letters a more personal look (unless you are also inserting the person’s name here and there throughout the letter, which actually gives the opposite impression).• For highly select audiences, use good quality stationery, first-class postage, a real person’s signature, and an individually typed address.• E-mail sales messages are a growing phenomenon. Although it’s unknown how consistently successful they are to date, they may be appropriate for your product or service. If this is a new area for you, work with one of the e-mail suppliers. Internet sales are definitely generating dollars, if not yet significant profits, but this sales approach resembles a catalog or television commercial, not a letter, and requires expertise of its own.WORDSabsoluteacquaintadaptableadvanceda d v a n t -affordableall-newattractiveagesauthenticbenefitsbrand-newb r e a k -throughchoiceclassiccleverc o m f o r t -ablecompactconfidentcontempor-convenientarydazzlingdelightfuld e m o n -d e p e n d -stratedabledetailsdiscoverydurableeconomicaleffectiveexception-excitingexclusivealexpertexquisiteextensivefactsfeaturesflairflexiblegenuineguaranteedhalf-pricehandyhelpfulhigh-qual-immediateindulgeinexpens-ityiveinformat-ingeniousinnovativeinstantive366 / HOW TO SAY IT®invaluableinvestmentlastinglow-costlow-pricedluxuriousm o n e y -naturalnewmakingnostalgicofferopportun-optionalitypersonaliz-pledgeportablepowerfulationpracticalprecisionpremiumproductiveprofession-profitableprovenqualityalrapid-ac-reasonablerebaterefundtionreliableresultsrevolution-rewardarysafesatisfactionsecuresolutionsophistic-spectaculars t a t e - o f -stunningatedthe-artsubstantialsuccessfulsuperthriftyt r e m e n d -trialu n b r e a k -u n c o n d i -ousabletionalup-to-dateurgentusefulu s e r -triendlyvaluableversatilewarrantedwaterproofwholesalePHRASESadd a new dimension toadvanced designall for one low priceall-in-one convenienceas an added bonusat a discount/a fraction of thecost/great savings/no expense to youavoid worry/embarrassment/dis-be more efficientcomfort/riskbe the first toboth practical and beautiful/decor-ativebudget-pleasing pricesbuilt-in featuresbusiness advancementbuy with confidenceHOW TO SAY IT® / 367can pay for itself incarefree upkeepc h o o s e   f r o m   o v e r   2 0come in and trystyles/cards/models/varietiescompact designcomplimentary copycontemporary/gracious designcustomer supportcutting edgedirect-to-you low pricesdirect your attention todiscover for yourselfdramatic differenceeasier and more enjoyable/comfort-ableeasier to use than ever beforeeasy/carefree maintenanceeasy-to-follow instructionselegant stylingengineered for dependabilityexciting details/offerexclusive featuresexperience the pleasure ofexpress your personalityfast, safe, easy-to-usefinely craftedfit-any-budget pricefully automated/warrantedget full detailsgives you your choice ofgreater safety/convenience/pleas-ure/popularitygreat gift ideahave the satisfaction of knowingif not completely satisfiedif you accept this invitation/respondright away/send payment nowimpressive collectionimproved appearanceincreased enjoymentincredibly low introductoryrate/price ofindulge yourselfinfluence othersin these fast-moving timesintelligent way toinvite you tojoin millions of others whojust a reminder thatjust pennies eachkey to your peace of mindlasting beautylets you enjoy more of your favoritelook forward to sending youlow, low pricesloyal customers like youmake it easy for yourselfmakes any day specialmany advantages ofmoney’s worthmore advanced featuresmore money/comfort/leisure368 / HOW TO SAY IT®more than fifty years of servicemost versatile, powerful, and excit-ing study aid availableno matter which set you chooseno more mess/lost sales/typing er-rors/fuss/worryno-risk examinationno strings attachednow for the first timeof particular importance to youone easy operationone of the largest and most respec-tedone reason among many to orderone size fits allorder todayour top-selleroutstanding featuresover 50,000 satisfied customersperfect gift for yourself or a lovedpleased to be able to offer youonepreferred customer/ratespreviously sold forprice you’ll appreciatepride of accomplishmentprivileges includeprofessional qualityprompt, courteous serviceproven reliability/technologyprovides the finest home hair careready to spoil you with its powerfulat the least costfeaturesreasonably pricedreduced pricerevolutionary approachreward yourself withrisk nothingrugged and dependablesatisfaction guaranteedsave money/timesecurity in your later yearssee for yourselfsimple stepsso unusual and striking thatspecial benefits/introductory of-state of the artfer/valuestep in the right directionstop those costly losses withsupply is limitedsurprise your special someone withtake advantage of this opportunitytake a giant step forward towardstake a moment right now to looktakes the gamble out of choosingover thistime is growing shorttimeless elegancetime-testedtop of the linetreat yourself tounconditional money-back guaran-teeHOW TO SAY IT® / 369under no obligation tounder our simple planunequalled savings and convenienceunique limited edition creationsunique opportunityurge you touse it anywhere, anytimewe’re making this generous offerbecausewhat better way towhole family can enjoywith no obligation on your partwith our complimentswon’t cost you a thing towon’t find better quality anywhereworld of enjoyment waiting for youyou can be proud ofyou don’t risk a pennyyou’ll be amazed to discoveryou might expect these to cost asyour money backmuch asyou will appreciate the outstandingquality of theseSENTENCESAt this low price, every home should have one.Be the first in your community to have one!But act now—we expect a sizable response and we want to be certain that your order is processed.Call today to arrange a demonstration.Discover savings of up to 50%.Discover the elegance of a genuine leather briefcase with discreet gold initials.Don’t miss out!Do your holiday shopping the easy way.Enjoy it for a 15-day home trial.Every item is offered at a discount.If you are not completely satisfied, simply return it for a full credit.In order to make this offer, we must have your check by September 1.It’s a first!It’s a no-strings offer.Join us today.Just bring this letter with you when you come in to sign up.Just what makes the Blount Filing System so great?370 / HOW TO SAY IT®May I make an appointment with you next week to explain/show/ demonstrate our latest line of products?Now there’s a new magazine just for you.Order one for every family member.Please don’t delay your decision—we expect a heavy demand for the Ellesmere filet knife.P.S. To lock in these great rates, we must receive your deposit by October 15.Returning the postage-paid reply card does not obligate you in any way.Send for your free copy of the Bemerton planning guide.Send today for free, no-obligation information on rates and available discounts, special services, and easy claims filing.Take a look at the enclosed brochure for a sneak preview.Telephone Sarah Lash, your personal representative, for an appointment.The Art Deco look fits almost any decorating scheme.There is absolutely no risk on your part.There’s no cost or obligation, of course.These low prices are effective only until June 1.This is just one more reason why our products have won such overwhelming acceptance.Use the order form and postpaid reply envelope enclosed to receive your first Holiday Bell absolutely free.We cannot extend this unusual offer beyond May 25, 2004.We invite you to complete the enclosed reservation request form and return it now to confirm your choice of dates.We’re making this unprecedented offer to a select group of business executives.We take all the risks.We’ve missed you!You can choose from over 150 different programs.You can now acquire a two-line telephone for far less than you ever thought possible.You’ll appreciate these fine features.You’ll like our convenient evening and weekend hours; you’ll love our brand-new equipment and experienced teachers!You’ll see that Rockminster China isn’t like other china.You may not have ever bought/invested/tried, which is why we are making you this no-risk trial offer.HOW TO SAY IT® / 371You must see the complete series for yourself to appreciate how it can enrich your life.PARAGRAPHSIf for any reason, at any time, you are not satisfied with your Haverley Air Cleaner, you can return it to us for a complete and prompt refund.No questions asked.P.S. The cookbook of your choice and the lucite book stand are both yours free—without obligation. All you need to do is send in the enclosed form.Send no money now. You will be billed at the time of shipment for any items ordered, plus shipping and sales tax (if applicable). You do not have to pay until you are totally convinced of the high quality and outstanding appeal of our lithographs and prints. If you are not delighted in every way, return your purchases within ten days, and you’ll owe nothing!There’s one sure way to convince you that Bryerley Bath Beads are the last word in luxurious skin-softeners. We’re enclosing sample packets of two of our most popular Bryerley scents, Gardenia and Lily of the Valley.P.S. This is your last chance to buy the kits at these low prices. Rising material costs require a moderate price increase effective next month.You want to give that special child in your life the finest reading—her or his very own books—but you don’t have the time to look at thousands of children’s books to find the best. That’s where we come in.Is a housecleaning service for you? We think so because you want the best for yourself and your family…and that takes time. Time you don’t always have after working all week and meeting important family needs after hours. We can offer you thorough, reasonably priced, once-a-week housecleaning that will make a big difference in your life. Think about what you could do with the hours you now have to spend on housework.Think about walking into a clean house at night. And then think about giving us a call to schedule an estimate interview.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Executive:According to several management studies, the single most important characteristic of an effective executive is the ability to manage time.Are you meeting your deadlines? Can you list your current projects in order of importance? Do you know where you’re headed over the next week, month, year? Can you find things when you need them? Do you assign work in the most time-effective ways?372 / HOW TO SAY IT®If you answered no to any of these questions, you’re sure to benefit from our popular, effective Time Management Workshop.In just two days you learn how to set priorities, how to use special tools to help you organize your time, and how to develop interpersonal skills to help you deal with unnecessary interruptions, inefficient staff, and group projects.In fact, we don’t want to be one of those interruptions, so we’ll make this short. We simply suggest that you save time by making time for the next Time Management Workshop in your area. You can do this in under a minute by checking off a convenient date and signing the enclosed postage-paid reply card or by calling 800/555-1707 to register.This is one workshop that won’t be a waste of time!Sincerely,Dear Marietta Lyddon,You were a member of the Atlas Fitness Club from March 15, 1996, to November 18, 2002, and according to our records you worked out regularly.Whatever your reasons for not being with us the past several years, you may want to know about some changes that have taken place since you were last here:New this year:Olympic-size pool with extended hours, 5:30 a.m. to midnight. A lifeguard is on duty at all times.New this year:Membership packages designed to fit your use patterns.You may now choose between an all-use pass or a pass that specifies morning hours, early morning hours, after-five hours, evening hours, late evening hours.New this year:Peripheral services that our members—most of whom are busy working people like yourself—have requested: a personal check-cashing service; yogurt, soup, and mineral water machines in the lobby; a telephone for the use of members making local calls; all-new padlocks for the lockers.New last year:We have 50% more equipment in the weight lifting room, and three new Nautilus units.If you liked us before, you’ll love us now. I think it’s worth a look, and I’m so convinced of this that I’m offering you a two-week membership for FREE.Just bring this letter with you when you come to give us another look!Sincerely yours,See also: ANNOUNCEMENTS, APPRECIATION, CONGRATULATIONS, COVER LETTERS, CREDIT, FOLLOW-UP, GOODWILL, HOLIDAYS, INVITATIONS, ORDERS, REQUESTS, THANK YOU.