45Sensitive LettersWhen it comes to bombshells, there are few that can be more effectivethan that small, flat, frail thing, a letter.—MARGARET DELANDIn some difficult situations, writing a letter is more effective than a face-to-face encounter. “Most people think better on their seat than on their feet.”(Dianna Booher) When writing a letter, you have time to reflect on what has happened, to inform yourself of related or supporting facts, to choose your words so that they convey exactly what you want to convey, and to rewrite the letter as many times as you need to until it accurately presents your position.Letters Require Sensitive Handling When You Must• ask someone to return an engagement ring• borrow money from a friend or family member• break off a relationship• claim credit for your work• clear yourself of an unjust accusation• deliver bad news• inquire about a gift or check that hasn’t been acknowledged• offer unsolicited and probably unwelcome advice• remind someone of an unpaid personal loan• report a child’s unpleasant behavior• report sexual harassment• reprimand an employee (see also EMPLOYMENT)• respond to someone with a terminal illness (see “GET WELL”)• tell the other person they’re wrong• turn someone down for a job whom you know well• uninvite guestsHow to Say It• Write promptly. Nothing will make a difficult letter more difficult to write than putting it off.373374 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Begin with a courteous expression about something, however small, that you can agree upon or that you have in common.• Admit (if it’s true) that you’re uncomfortable with the situation.• State the issue clearly and directly. Dressing up your message in big words, roundabout phrases, and conciliatory sentences only antag-onizes the other person. If you have trouble writing this part of the letter, say your message aloud as though speaking to a friend. Boil down your “conversation” to a sentence or two that expresses the heart of the matter.• Provide facts and details of the issue.• Convey your understanding of the other person’s position.• Admit your role in the situation, if you have one. When you take responsibility for your contribution, others are more likely to own up to theirs.• Examine your position for areas of negotiation. Can you trade one point for another? Can you accept anything less than what you originally wanted?• State what you are asking or what solution you want.• Close with a wish to put the matter behind you, with an expression of confidence that the situation will be resolved, with a statement that a satisfactory solution will benefit both of you, or with a sentence conveying your goodwill.What Not to Say• • Don’t tell people what to do (this sentence doesn’t count). Words like “must,” “ought,” and “should” raise most people’s hackles. Replace them with “might like to,” “could consider,” or other more open-ended phrases.• Don’t write unpleasantries. They live forever and you will not forget—or be allowed to forget—them.• Don’t use words that trigger negative reactions in the reader. Although almost any words, when strung together in the right order, could annoy a person, some are immediately inflammatory: “obviously” and “clearly” (of course it isn’t obvious or clear, or the other person would have known it—are you saying they’re stupid?); “you appear to think,” “according to you,” “you claim,” and “if you are to be believed” (these belittle the other person’s word); “you must agree” or “at least you will admit” (not so—these phrases make the person want to not agree and not admit).• Don’t use words like “problem,” “argument,” “battle,” “disagreement” or those labeling a situation negative or adversarial.• Don’t exaggerate or dramatize: “You egregiously underestimated”;“In all my years as a coach I’ve never seen anything as reprehensible”;“I will never be able to forget what you did”; “You have contributedHOW TO SAY IT® / 375absolutely nothing to the department.” When the words “never” and“always” appear, you are probably exaggerating or dramatizing.“Magnifying a matter is not the way to mend it.” (Ivy Compton-Burnett)• Don’t be too “sensitive” when writing a letter about a sensitive issue:“I hesitated a long time before writing this…”; “I hate to write because I know how upset you get”; “Now don’t be mad, but…”; “Promise me you won’t take this the wrong way…” State calmly and neutrally what the issues are; leave the emotions (theirs and yours) out of it.• Concentrate on facts instead of feelings. “I don’t feel this is fair” does not carry as much weight as, “The guidelines for the competition stated clearly that…”• Don’t assume you have all the facts. Check your assumptions. Particularly when a number of people are involved, an issue can become muddled.• Don’t make a decision sound negotiable if it is not. It is kinder to be clear that the answer is no, the news is bad, the response is negative.• Don’t deal with other matters in a letter about a touchy situation; save them for later. Sometimes people try to hide the difficult part of the letter in a jumble of news, offhand remarks, or other distractions. It doesn’t work.• Don’t try to teach people a lesson, lecture them, or label their behavior if you want to achieve a specific goal (the return of a tool, repayment of a debt, stopping a behavior, undoing a wrong). If you want to vent and don’t care if you ever see the person again, it doesn’t matter what you say.• Don’t put people on the defensive by attacking them or disparaging their personality, character, intelligence, or looks. People who have been made to feel stupid and little are not apt to give you what you want. Focus on the behavior, the facts, the central issue. Getting personal indicates a weak position and “anger is not an argument.”(Daniel Webster)• Don’t threaten (lawsuit, loss of your friendship, some action). It won’t solve the problem and it weakens your side of the issue. “Never give anyone an ultimatum unless you are prepared to lose.” (Abigail Van Buren)Tips on Writing• Think twice before offering unsolicited advice or “help.” “It’s awfully important to know what is and what is not your business.”(Gertrude Stein)• Before writing the letter, finish this sentence: “I want them to…”Do you want a rebate, an exchange, repairs? Do you want an apology, a corrected statement, a credit? Do you want something redone? Do376 / HOW TO SAY IT®you want to convince the person that facts, statistics, opinions are wrong? Be clear about your goal.• Link some good news to the bad news. This shouldn’t be artificial or inappropriate good news, but any upbeat items help put the unpleasant part of the letter in a more hopeful context.• When possible, help the other person save face. Set up the situation so that the person can do what you want and at the same time feel generous, gracious, powerful, and willing.• We usually prefer active voice to passive voice. However, the passive voice is more tactful in a touchy situation. Instead of writing,“You did this,” write, “This was done.”• You can say you are angry, disappointed, upset, distressed, appalled, or anything else you might feel. In fact, the more carefully you choose the words that describe your position, the clearer the communication will be. What is unacceptable is abusing the other person verbally. The difference often lies between “I” statements and “you”statements: “I am upset about the dent in my car door” is appropriate;“You are an idiot and they should take away your license” is not—unless, of course, you don’t care if the person pays for the dent or if you ever see them again. Strive for a letter that is factual, dispassionate, considerate, and even-handed. When you write a letter in the midst of your anger, don’t mail it; reread and rewrite your letter several times over a period of days.• When writing a letter about a sensitive subject, ask someone you trust to read your letter before you send it.Special Situations• A profoundly bitter, prejudiced, hostile, accusatory, or hate-mongering letter requires careful handling. If you think the writer could be dangerous, consult with police or an attorney. In any case, you need never respond to an abusive letter. At the mild end of the spectrum, when the person simply seems to be letting off steam (and you think a response is called for), reply with “I am sorry to hear you feel that way.”• When writing to borrow money from a friend or relative, remain businesslike about how much you need, why you need it, and when you will repay it. Offer to sign an agreement. Reassure the person that you will understand if they have to refuse you.• Sexual harassment consists of unwelcome, unsolicited, nonrecip-rocated sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, sexually motivated physical contact, or communication of a sexual nature, usually by someone who has power over another person. It includes comments, jokes, looks, innuendoes, and physical contact, and emphasizes a person’s sex role over any function as a worker. It is against the law.HOW TO SAY IT® / 377If you are on the receiving end of such behavior, a good first step is a letter notifying the person that you consider the conduct sexual harassment. It used to be that saying anything about another’s offensive behavior not only got you nowhere, but got you in trouble. This is no longer quite as true. Depending on your situation, a quiet warning note might be all that’s needed. If you are the offender and have been called on it, (1) educate yourself about the issues until you feel sure you know where the boundaries are; (2) write a brief note of apology, thanking the person for letting you know and stating that you will comply with the request; (3) never repeat the behavior. Few reasonable people will bring a charge of sexual harassment against a one-time offender who didn’t realize the original harm done and who is now apologetic and reformed.• In the case of a serious disagreement, begin by referring to the previous correspondence or to the event responsible for the present letter. Outline the two opposing views or actions. Give clear (perhaps numbered) reasons for your stand, using statistics, quotations from an employee handbook, supportive anecdotal material, and names of witnesses or others who agree with you (with their permission). If appropriate, suggest an intermediate stage of negotiation: a reply to specific questions in your letter; further research; a meeting between the two of you or with third parties present; visits to a lawyer, accountant, or other appropriate adviser. If the disagreement has reached the stage where you can effectively do this, finish by stating clearly the outcome you desire. End with your best wishes for a solution acceptable to both of you and a reference to good future relations.• When requesting a favor that makes you uncomfortable, admit it. You will make the request more easily if you can accept “no” for an answer, and if you make this clear to the other person.• When reprimanding an employee, begin with a positive or complimentary remark. Describe the employee behavior and tell why it is unacceptable. Mention how it came to your attention. Suggest how the employee can improve or change. Outline any previous history of the same behavior (documenting this with dated reprimands). State the consequences of continuing the behavior. Tell exactly what you expect the employee to do (apologize, take a class, speak to you, not repeat the behavior). Say that this letter will be placed in their file.Close with an expression of confidence that the situation will be successfully dealt with. You may want the employee to sign and date the letter to verify having read it. A reprimand is brief, respectful, encouraging, and positive (instead of writing, “Don’t send out any letters with misspellings,” write, “Please use your spellcheck function followed by a dictionary check of any questionable words”).378 / HOW TO SAY IT®Format• Sensitive business matters are typed on letterhead stationery to convey formality and a certain neutrality. This will have a “cool” tone.When a business matter has personal aspects, handwrite it. This letter will have a “warm” tone.• A sensitive personal matter is dealt with in a letter written by hand or typed on personal stationery.• E-mail and fax are inappropriate for sensitive issues.WORDSambiguousannoyancearrangebothersomeburdensomecircumstancescomplexdifficultdilemmadiscussdisinclineddistressingdisturbingembarrassmentextenthardshipimpedeinconvenientinopportuneinterveneinvolvedmediatenegotiateobjectopposepredicamentproblemprotestpuzzlingrefusal 11regrettablereluctantthornytroublesometroublingunfavorableunfortunateunhappyunpromisingunsuccessfuluntimelyunwillingupsettingworryingPHRASESagree to disagreeapologize for my partappreciate your willingness tocome to termsdeal withdifficult to understandfind a middle groundgive and takehappy to sit down and discussin the futurelook forward topleased to be able to discussrough goingstate of affairsticklish situationwith your helpwork for a happy endingwork out a solutionwould like to hear your sideHOW TO SAY IT® / 379SENTENCESDo you have time to discuss this over a cup of coffee?I feel sure you will make the best decision for all involved.I hope you will understand that while I am in the early stages of recovery I simply can’t be around some of my old friends—wish me well and I will call you when I can.I understand you have some thoughts about my work, behavior, and looks, and I would like to discuss these with you directly instead of hearing them second-hand.The language and tone of your last letter is unacceptable to us. Please forward our file to someone else in your organization who can handle this matter.You don’t have to understand where I’m coming from or agree with me or even like what I’m saying, but would you—as my good, dear friend—do me the great favor of not using crude language around me?PARAGRAPHSI’m sorry to have to write again about the $500 you owe me. I helped you with the clear understanding that the money would be repaid within two months. I’ve given you at least a month’s grace, but I must insist on receiving the money before the end of the week.I was surprised to learn last week from Miles MacPhadraick that you and he had been discussing your new alarm system. I suspect I misun-derstood him because it sounded like the system I’ve been working on.You might be interested in seeing my record of invention (enclosed). I’d be happy to show you what I’m doing if you stop by the lab sometime.Alert! Alert! Jay, I need my kayak. Now! Every time I’ve called I was sure we understood each other. Maybe a note will do the trick. Just keep saying to yourself: Kayak. Back. To Jack.I’d like to set the record straight: it was not I who called you an ugly name. I don’t know who it was. The person who ascribed it to me was mistaken. In any case, that’s not my style—and I think you know that.As you know, the Financial Commission has been very pleased with your work. Unfortunately, there is not quite enough of it. Your coffee breaks and lunch hours have been growing increasingly lengthy over the past few months. I realize it’s tempting to slip out to run an errand or two or to go to the gym for a workout, but the company has a zero tolerance policy for short workdays. Please let us have a full measure of your fine work.As you can imagine, I wish I had any other response to give you. I would have enjoyed working with you. The decision has been made, however, to hire someone with more experience in livestock production.380 / HOW TO SAY IT®Christy and Ben tell me that Jimmy and Letty have been teasing them unmercifully about having two mothers instead of a mother and father.Some of the remarks sound oddly adult—not the sort of thing that preschoolers would come up with on their own. I know you have not been particularly happy to have us in the neighborhood, but we’re sad to see the children involved this way. We’d like to invite the two of you and Jimmy and Letty for a couscous dinner one night next week. Perhaps we can find enough common ground to allow us to live in a neighborly way.About your visit this weekend—Biddy is quite upset at the thought of having Pip in the house again. She isn’t frightened of all dogs but Pip feels unpredictable to her. At any rate, we’ve made reservations for you at the Gargery Motel nearby. They welcome pets. Let us know if this is all right with you.You’re my brother and I love you, but please don’t come to the house again when you’ve been drinking. It disturbs the children, and because they look up to you it sets an unfortunate example. You’ll be welcome any other time. When you’ve been drinking, I will not be able to invite you in.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Mrs. Tilford,We all enjoyed Mary’s stay with us last weekend. Because it was so pleasant, I’m sorry to be writing with this problem.When I was a child, my father brought me back a small carved giraffe from Africa. As he died soon afterwards, I have always treasured this memento. I missed it Sunday evening and spent several days looking for it. Karen told me that Mary now carries it around in her schoolbag and freely admits to “finding” it here. In her six-year-old way, Karen demanded it back, but Mary was evidently not ready to let it go. I trust that you will find some good way of convincing Mary to return it.Thank you for taking care of this.Sincerely,My dear Annie-Laurie,I’ve lost the rhinestone necklace you lent me for the dinner dance last week. I am devastated. I’ve looked everywhere for it. I’ve called the hotel, the taxi company, everyone who was at the dance. Nothing. I’m not giving up (I’m putting an ad in the paper this week), but the situation is looking hopeless and I need to let you know what is going on.I will of course replace it, but since it was your mother’s, there’s no way to make up for its sentimental value. I’ll call you tomorrow to seeHOW TO SAY IT® / 381what’s the best way of going about this. My deepest apologies for an unforgivable loss.My dear Bryn,I’ve been doing a lot of thinking lately. I know you noticed because you’ve asked me several times what’s wrong. What’s wrong is that I’ve realized I don’t have the kind of feelings for you that I want to have if we are to spend the rest of our lives together.I think the world of you—and you know that’s true—but I’m convinced my love for you is not a marrying kind of love. It’s a friendship kind of love.I waited to write this letter until I was very, very sure of my thoughts and feelings. You’ve done nothing wrong and there is nothing you can do to spark something that isn’t there. I don’t want to leave you with any doubts or hopes about what I’m saying.I’m probably the last person who can be of support to you, but if there’s anything I can do to make this easier, let me know. In the meantime, know that you are and will always be one of the dearest people in my life.TO: Gus ParkingtonFROM: Alice SandersonDATE: Nov. 13, 2002RE: RequestI need to tell you that repeatedly touching my arm or putting your arm around my shoulder is inappropriate in a business setting (it would actually also be inappropriate outside the business setting because I don’t welcome such gestures from people I don’t know well).In the office, this is considered sexual harassment. I would appreciate keeping our exchanges on a professional level. Knowing how intelligent and quick-on-the-uptake you are, I feel sure we need never discuss this again.Dear Lizzie and Jim,We are still talking about your beautiful wedding! I meant to ask you if the singer was a friend of yours—his voice was stunning.I’m wondering if you received my wedding gift. As it was rather fra-gile, I hesitate to pay my Cecil-Roberts charge balance until I am sure that (a) you did indeed receive it and (b) it arrived in one piece. I have visions of it having arrived damaged and you not knowing quite what to do about it.Give my love to your mother when you see her, will you, Lizzie?Fondly,Bert382 / HOW TO SAY IT®Dear Hamilton,We are fortunate that in such a large, high-pressure office we all get along so well. You are one of the ones who keep the social temperature at such a comfortable setting. I don’t know anyone in the office who is better liked than you.You can perhaps help with this. The collection of contributions towards gifts for employees’ personal-life events is becoming a little troubling.Certainly, the communal sending of a gift is justified now and then. In the past month, however, there have been collections for two baby shower gifts, one wedding shower gift, two wedding gifts, one funeral remembrance, four birthday gifts, and three graduation gifts.It’s not only the collected-from who are growing uncomfortable (and poor), but the collected-for feel uneasy receiving gifts from people who don’t know them outside the office, who wouldn’t even recognize their graduating children, their marrying daughters and sons, or their deceased relatives.This is essentially a kind gesture (and one that people think well of you for), but the practice seems to have become too wide-ranging and feels inappropriate in today’s office setting.Thank you for understanding.See also: ADJUSTMENTS, BELATED, COMPLAINTS, DISAGREEMENT, REFUSALS, SYMPATHY.