47Thank-You LettersHis courtesy was somewhat extravagant. He would write and thank peoplewho wrote to thank him for wedding presents and when he encountered anyoneas punctilious as himself the correspondence ended only with death.—EVELYN WAUGHThank-you letters enhance business and personal relationships and handsomely reward those who make a practice of sending them. Despite this, people find them difficult to write, which is perhaps why so many arrive late or not at all.When you’re unsure if a thank you is necessary, err on the side of“necessary.” Even when you have graciously thanked someone in person, a written thank you is often expected or required or, at the least, appreciated. In the business world, the thank-you note has become a must if you care about your career. “Anyone too busy to say thank you will get fewer and fewer chances to say it.” (Harvey Mackay) For wedding gift thank yous, see WEDDINGS.Write Thank-You Letters for• appreciation/congratulations/recognition• contributions: fundraising drives/memorials/charities• employee suggestions/outstanding efforts/jobs well done• expressions of sympathy• favors/kindness/assistance/special help/advice• gifts: business/personal• hospitality: business/personal• job interviews• money: gifts/bonuses/loans• orders: new/unusual• patronage: new account/first purchase/good customer• referrals: customers/clients/patients• requested information/materials/documents• sales prospects• wedding and wedding shower gifts (see WEDDINGS) 395396 / HOW TO SAY IT®How to Say It• Describe in some detail what you are grateful for (not just “the lovely gift” or “the nice present”).• Express your gratitude in an enthusiastic, appreciative way.• Elaborate on your appreciation. Tell how useful or appropriate it is, how you plan to use it, where you have placed it, or how it enhances your life, home, office, wardrobe. Be specific about what pleased you.• Close with one or two sentences unrelated to the object of your gratitude (expressing affection, promising to see the person soon, sending greetings to family members, saying something nice about the donor).What Not to Say• Don’t dilute your thanks by including news, information, questions, and comments; save them for another time.• When you receive duplicate gifts, don’t mention this to the givers.• Don’t ask where the gift was purchased so you can exchange it.• Some etiquette authorities say not to mention the amount of a money gift. They suggest instead speaking of the giver’s kindness, generosity, or, perhaps, extravagance. However, if both you and the gift-giver are comfortable with a mention of the amount, this is an acceptable choice.• A few letterwriting experts dislike the “Thanks again” that concludes so many thank-you letters and notes. However, it is a popular and benign way of reminding the reader of the purpose of the letter. If you like it, use it.• “Never express more than you feel” is a good guideline, especially in thank-you letters, where we try to make up in verbiage what we lack in enthusiasm. A simple “thank you” is effective.Tips on Writing• Write soon. It’s easier to find the words when you feel grateful than it is after your enthusiasm has cooled. It’s also more courteous.Most givers don’t need your thanks as much as they need to know if the gift arrived (especially if it was sent from a store) and if it pleased you. Some people think a thank-you note should be written within three days of receiving a gift. Certainly two weeks would be a maximum. For a stay in someone’s home, write within one to three days, but certainly within a week; for dinners and other hospitality, within a day or two. When responding to expressions of sympathy, you haveHOW TO SAY IT® / 397up to six weeks because of the special hardships involved. For “get well” gifts, wait until you are well enough to write comfortably (a friend can acknowledge gifts for you in the meantime).• You are not obliged to write a thank you (although of course it is always in excellent taste and will be greatly appreciated if you do) for: a party at which you were not the guest of honor; a casual dinner, lunch, or cocktail party; birthday, anniversary, congratulations, and“get well” cards and greetings; favors and hospitality extended by people with whom you are close (a sibling, a neighbor) and with whom you have reciprocal arrangements. In these cases, thank the person by telephone or the next time you see them.• Overnight hospitality always warrants a thank-you note—and usually a gift, which you bring with you or send afterwards (popular items are specialty foods, houseplants, flowers, something for the house, toys for the children). When you write a family, address the parents, but mention the children by name (and if you say something complimentary about them, you will have more than justified your invitation). If you write to only the one who invited you or the one who was primarily responsible for your comfort, extend your thanks to the other household members.Special Situations• A late “thank you” is harder to defend than any other delayed message, but it is better to write late than not at all. In his delightful manners book for children,How Rude!, Alex J. Packer tells them,“Thank-you notes get exponentially more difficult to write with each day that passes. By the second day, they arefourtimes harder to write.By the third day, they areninetimes harder, and if you wait twelve days, they are 144 times harder to write!” Don’t spend more than a phrase or a sentence apologizing for the delay: “My thanks are no less sincere for being so unforgivably late.” “I am sorry not to have told you sooner how much we enjoyed the petit fours.”• Yes, you send a thank-you note for a thank-you gift, if for no other reason than to let the person know it arrived.• When someone donates money to a charity in your honor or in memory of a deceased relative, the charity will acknowledge the contribution to the donor, usually with a printed card or form letter, but you also write a thank-you note.• Although the guest or guests of honor at an anniversary party, birthday party, or shower always thank each friend warmly for gifts as they are opened, thank-you notes are still required. The party or shower host should receive a special thank you as well as a small gift.• An essential job-seeking technique as well as a gesture of courtesy is to thank the person who interviews you. Write a note immediately398 / HOW TO SAY IT®after the interview and before a decision has been made. State what you liked about the interview, the company, the position. Emphasize briefly and specifically your suitability for the job. Address concerns about your qualifications that came up during the interview. Mention any issue that you didn’t have the opportunity to discuss.• Although business entertaining is often taken for granted, a thank you is appreciated and builds good relations. Notes to a colleague, client, employee, or supplier inspire loyalty, enthusiasm, and increased productivity. When you receive a gift from a business contact, write a thank you, even though you suspect hundreds of gifts were sent.When you are unable to accept a business gift, avoid any implied accusation of poor taste on the giver’s part when you write your thank-you-but-I-must-refuse letter; explain simply that your firm doesn’t allow you to accept gifts.• When gifts arrive early for an event, write thank-you notes after the special day.• When you receive a gift from more than one person, write personalized thank-you notes to each one. You don’t need to do this when you receive a gift from a family (even when all five of them sign the card) or when you receive a gift from a group such as your bridge club, teachers at your school, your co-workers. You can write one letter to the group but circulate or post it so that everyone who contributed sees it.• After a death in the family, thank-you notes are written to people who sent flowers or donations, and to those who helped with hot meals, hosted dinners, put up out-of-town relatives, lent chairs, or were otherwise supportive. You also respond to those who sent notes of condolence (exception: those who sent printed cards with only a signature and no personal message). You may use the printed cards supplied by the funeral home if you add a personal note. When the person closest to the deceased is unable to manage the correspondence, a family member or friend writes thank-you notes on their behalf. The notes need not be long and, traditionally, you have up to six weeks after the funeral to send them. To keep track of who sent flowers, a family member or funeral home official should collect the attached cards and write a description of the flowers on them.• Send thank-you notes to sales prospects for the time they spend with you on the phone or in the office. Your notes—which take only minutes to write—will secure for you their good will and their increased willingness to speak with you next time. (You also may surprise yourself by liking this part of your work—after the first few notes anyway.)• For a few special gifts, you may want to write two thank-you notes, the first when you receive the gift (a check or a fondue set, for example) and the second when you use it (“we used your gift to enrollHOW TO SAY IT® / 399in a ballroom dancing class, something we’ve wanted to do for years”or “we invited the cousins over for fondue and told them that they could thank you too!”).Format• Thank-you messages are almost always handwritten on foldovers, note cards, or personal stationery. Typewritten thanks are acceptable when they are part of a long, personal letter to family or friends.• Use formal printed or engraved stationery to write thank-you notes for important events (weddings, for example).• Business thank yous are typed on letterhead stationery, personal-business stationery, or good bond paper. When you want a warmer tone, hand-write your note.• Commercial foldovers with “Thanks” or “Thank you” are convenient and acceptable; a handwritten note goes on the inside page. Contemporary thank-you cards with sentimental or humorous messages are also appropriate as long as a handwritten message is added.• When you need to thank many people, it is appropriate (and, in some areas, expected) to insert a thank-you notice in the local newspaper. The nurses, doctors, hospital staff, friends, and family who helped someone through a long and demanding illness are often thanked.The funeral of a public figure may inspire hundreds of notes of condolence, which are best acknowledged in a newspaper announcement.Recently elected public officials thank those who worked and voted for them. The wording is simple and warm: “We wish to thank all the generous and loving friends and family who sent cards and gifts on the occasion of our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary.”• Can you e-mail your thanks? In most cases, no. Certainly e-mail is suitable for quick thanks between longtime friends for the loan of a book, a small favor, a light lunch. It can also be used as a down-payment on a “real” thank-you note, written primarily to say that the gift arrived and that a letter will follow. The point of a thank-you note is that it is personal. E-mail has many virtues, but graciousness and formality are not among them.• Miss Manners (Judith Martin of theWashington Post) warns against faxing a thank you to someone who has just bought your product. She points out that the recipient must pay for such a thank you (fax paper, the time the letter occupies the machine, machine depreciation).WORDSappreciatebountifulcaptivatedcharmingcherishedclassicdelightedelegantenchantedenjoyed400 / HOW TO SAY IT®excitedfascinatedfavoriteflatteredgenerositygraciousgratefulhospitableimpressedindebtedinvaluablekeepsakekindnessl a r g e -lovelyheartedluxuriousmemorableneededo n e - o f - a -overjoyedkindo v e r -perfectpleasedpricelessremarkablewhelmedsatisfyingsensationalsophistic-specialspectacularatedstrikingstunnedsumptuoussuperbsurprisedtastefulterrificthoughtfulthrilledtimelesstimelytouchedtreasuretreatuniqueusefulvaluablewell-madewonderfulPHRASESabsolutely perfect choice for meappreciate your confidence/in-terest/kind words/referrala rare treatcannot tell you how delighted I wascharming of youconsider me deeply in your debt forconvey my personal thanks todeeply appreciateeveryone whoderived great pleased fromdid us good/our hearts goodenjoyable and informative tourenjoyed it/ourselves enormouslyexcellent/splendid suggestionfelt right at homefrom the bottom of my heartgenerous giftgreat gift for usheartfelt/hearty thankshow kind/dear/thoughtful/sweethow much it meant to usof you toI am indebted/very much obligedI have seldom seen suchto you forI’ll long rememberimportant addition toI plan to use it for/toI really treasureit was a great pleasureit was hospitable/kind of you toHOW TO SAY IT® / 401I will never forgetmade us feel so welcomemany thanksmeant a great deal to memore people have remarked on themore than kindmost sincerely grateful to you formost thoughtful and generousmuch obligedone of the most memorable days ofmy tripone of your usual inspired ideasperfect gift/presentplease accept my gratitude/our sin-pleased as Punchcere appreciationprofoundly touched byquite out of the ordinaryreally appreciate your helpseventh heavenso characteristically thoughtfulthoroughly enjoyed myselftickled our fancytruly a marveltruly gratefulvery special occasionwe want you to know how much wewe were especially pleased becausevaluewe were simply thrilled/de-what a joy it was to receivelighted/stunned withwill be used every day/oftenwith your usual inimitableflair/stylewonderful addition toyou made me feel so special byyou may be sure that I appreciateyou must be a mindreaderyour generous giftyour gift meant a lot to me at thistime becauseyour thoughtful/kind expression ofsympathySENTENCESAll of us were touched by your thoughtfulness.As soon as we decide what to do with your wonderful gift [money] we will let you know.How dear of you—we are delighted!How did you know we needed one?I appreciate your advice more than I can say.I can’t remember when I’ve had a better/more pleasant/more relaxing/more enjoyable time.402 / HOW TO SAY IT®I can’t thank you enough for chauffeuring me around while my knee was in the immobilizer.I’ll cherish your gift always.I love it!I’m grateful for your help, and hope that I can reciprocate some day.In the past several weeks, you have kindly referred Harvey Birch, Frances Wharton, and Judith Hunter to the Cooper Architectural Group—we are grateful!I owe you one!I plan to use your gift to buy a wok—we’ve always wanted one.I treasure the paperweight—it will always remind me of you.It was kind of you to let me know about the job opening—I’ll keep you posted.I very much appreciate your concern.Madeleine will be writing you herself, but I wanted to thank you for knowing just what would please a nine-year-old.More people have remarked on it!On behalf of the family of Violet Effingham Chiltern, I thank you for your kind expression of sympathy.Special thanks to the doctors and the nurses at Trewsbury County Hospital.Thanks a million.Thanks for recommending Bates Craters and Freighters—they’ve been as good as you said they were.Thanks for the great advice on patio brick—I’m pleased with what we finally bought.Thanks for thinking of me.Thanks for your order and for the interest in Leeds Sporting Goods that prompted it.Thank you for including me in this memorable/special event.Thank you for opening a charge account with us recently.Thank you for shopping regularly at Farrell Power & Light.Thank you for your courtesy and patience in allowing me to pay off the balance of my Irving Products, Inc. account in small installments.Thank you for your generous donation to the Dunstone Foundation in memory of James Calpon Amswell; he would have been pleased and I appreciate your comforting gesture very much.Thank you for your kind hospitality last night; I have never felt less a stranger in a strange city.Thank you so much for agreeing to speak to our study club.HOW TO SAY IT® / 403The letter of reference you so kindly wrote for me must have been terrific—Goodman & Co. called yesterday with a job offer!This is just a note to thank you for rushing the steel shelving to us in time for our event.Visions of Paradiseis a stunning book, and we are all enjoying it immensely.We all thank you for the tickets to the science museum.We are thrilled with the handsome brass bookends you sent!We will never forget the autumn glories of the North Shore—thank you so much for inviting us to share your cabin with you last weekend.You can see what a place of honor we’ve given your gift the next time you stop by.You couldn’t have found anything I’d enjoy more.You shouldn’t have, but since you did, may I say that your choice was absolutely inspired!PARAGRAPHSThank you for agreeing to write a letter of recommendation for me, especially since I know how busy you are this time of year. I’m enclosing a stamped envelope addressed to the personnel officer at Strickland Construction. I will, of course, let you know at once if I get the job. In the meantime, thanks again for your kindness.I want to thank you for all the time you put into coaching the Crossley-area baseball team this summer. It was a joy to watch you and your enthusiastic players model sporting behavior and team spirit to some of the younger teams. The assistance of our volunteer coaches is crucial to the survival of this program, and the Board of Directors joins me in sending you our admiration and thanks.On behalf of the directors, staff, and employees of Mallinger Electronics, I want to thank you for your splendid arrangements for the Awards Banquet Night. Decorations, food, program, and hospitality were all first-rate. Please convey our admiration and thanks to your committee chairs. If you can possibly face the thought, we’d like you to chair next year’s celebration. The evening was an outstanding success in every way, primarily due to your organizational abilities, creativity, and interpersonal skills.Thank you so much for the graduation check. As you know, I’m saving everything I earn for college, so when I received your card and gift, I knew right away what I was going to do with it! I’ve been needing and wanting a decent watch for a long time, and I can hardly wait to choose one. Every time I look at my new watch, I’ll think of you with affection and gratitude.It is my understanding that you wrote a letter supporting my nomin-404 / HOW TO SAY IT®ation by the Department of Materials Science and Engineering as a Distinguished Professor. I am happy to inform you that I was indeed honored with this title on June 3, 2002. I am deeply appreciative of your kind support in this regard. Many thanks.The kindness and generosity you showed to all of us at the time of Edgar’s death are much appreciated. What a good idea to send a plant; we’ve put the chrysanthemums in Edgar’s perennial garden. Thanks too for the hot meals, the touching letter that I know you put your whole self into, and for your constant support. We’re blessed to count you as a friend.What a wonderful engagement gift! We haven’t even begun to think of planning our wedding as we’ve heard it’s so much work and so complicated. With this marvelous book on wedding planning, I think we can quit worrying.Your dad said you picked out my tie all by myself. Thank you! Aunt Belinda just took a picture of me wearing the tie and eating a piece of birthday cake. When we get the pictures developed I’ll send you one so you can see how nice I look in my new tie.I would like to thank one of your sales staff for being helpful, tactful, and speedy—all at the same time! I foolishly tried to buy a wedding gift on my lunch hour, and I am a poor shopper at the best of times. Within minutes, this young man helped me select the absolutely perfect gift at the price I wanted to pay. It was all done so smoothly that I was out of the store before I knew it—and before I thought to ask his name. The initials on my sales slip are R.J. Can you identify him and pass on my thanks?Thanks for the Mozartkugeln! One of my favorite annual rituals is watching the Wimbledon tennis finals in bed (they start at 7:00 a.m.).The women’s final was great, and that’s when I ate the Mozartkugeln—they were deliciously decadent. When I lived in Salzburg, a shop near my apartment made them daily. They cost about a quarter each then, and every day after class I made my little journey there to get one.Thank you for the assistance, information, and encouragement you offered us when Hannah was applying to the U.S. Air Force Academy.We’re convinced that her acceptance was due in no small measure to your support and advocacy.Thank you for your most welcome letter of September 28. I am impressed with your generosity in sending complimentary subscriptions of the magazine to our doctors and nurses presently working in Tanzania.They will make good use of then—they estimate that each copy of the magazine is held by over fifty pairs of hands!I enjoyed this morning’s discussion of the research position you want to fill. I was pleased to know that my advanced degree is definitely an asset. I’ve been “overqualified” for several jobs, and was beginning to wonder if my extra years of study were of any value in the job market.Thanks so much for your time and for the congenial interview.HOW TO SAY IT® / 405SAMPLE LETTERSDear Mr. Hollingford,Thank you for remembering my five-year anniversary with the company. I didn’t think anyone would notice except me! I’ve enjoyed working here and plan to stay as long as you’ll have me. Thank you, too, for the gift certificate to Sweeney Inn. I have another anniversary coming up (three years of marriage), and I know where we’ll celebrate it.Sincerely,Dear Aune Esther Koskenmaki Lilley,Thank you so much for sending us a copy of your book,Father Said,“Eat, Don’t Giggle!”You are quite right in thinking that our collection of folklore materials can benefit from your contribution, especially since Finnish folklore is of particular interest to our Folk Arts Division.Again, thank you for your book.Sincerely,Dear Agnes and Walter,Thank you for the lovely silver piggy bank you gave Anabel. It’s a classic, and I know she will treasure it all her life. In the meantime, it has a place of honor on her dresser, and we’ve gotten into the habit of putting our change into it at the end of the day.Can you come by to see your new little grand-niece sometime next week? We’re all feeling rested by now and would love to see you. Give me a call.With much love,Dear Millicent,The dinner party was elegant and memorable, and we were delighted to be included. I don’t know anyone who has as much flair and style as you do when it comes to entertaining!Fondly,Dear Vincent Crummies:Thank you for your contribution of $200 to the Alumni Annual Giving Campaign. As stipulated on the donor card returned to this office, your gift will be designated for the Annual Giving Fund to be used where most needed.We also appreciate your use of the Langdon Co. matching gifts program and look forward to receiving their one-for-one matching gift. This matching gift will also be directed to the Annual Giving Fund.Thank you again for your generosity, which will make it possible for406 / HOW TO SAY IT®many young women and young men to have the advantage of a quality education.Very truly yours,See also: ACCEPTANCES, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, APPRECIATION, BELATED, RESPONSES.