49Wedding CorrespondenceI joined a singles group in my neighborhood. The other day the presidentcalled me up and said, “Welcome to the group. I want to find out what kind ofactivities you like to plan.” I said, “Well, weddings.”—LYNN HARRISAll correspondence relating to weddings or commitment ceremonies, including engagements, is in this chapter. However, supporting advice may also be found in the chapters on ACCEPTANCES, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ANNOUNCEMENTS, BELATED, CONGRATULATIONS, INVITATIONS, REFUSALS, REQUESTS, RESPONSES, THANK YOU.The only hard-and-fast rules for weddings and wedding correspondence today are those requiring courtesy, appropriateness, and common sense. The guidelines given below blend tradition and contemporary custom to provide you with a framework onto which you can sculpt your own individual tastes and circumstances.Wedding Correspondence Includes• acknowledging gifts• announcements: printed/engraved/newspaper• cancellation• confirmation of arrangements• congratulations on wedding• families of wedding couple exchanging letters• informing ex-spouse of remarriage• invitations: showers/parties/dinners/wedding• postponement• responses: invitations/announcements• selecting ceremony participants: attendants/presider/organist/musicians/reception helpers• showers: invitations/thank yous• thanking people for gifts/favors/greetings/assistance 413414 / HOW TO SAY IT®How to Say It• Engagement announcements can be made in one of four ways. (1) Handwrite individual letters to family and friends that include: name of the person you are to marry; wedding date (if known); if you choose, tell briefly how you met and how long you’ve known the person; some expression of your happiness; a personal comment (the other person is the first to know, you can’t wait for them to meet your intended). (2) Insert an announcement in the newspaper that includes: your full names; hometowns; parents’ names and hometowns; education backgrounds and places of employment; date of wedding or general plans (“a spring wedding is planned”). Some newspapers have requirements and deadlines for engagement announcements, and some will run either an engagement or a wedding announcement, but not both, so check beforehand. (3) Send formal printed or engraved engagement announcements: “Maria and Ernest Rockage announce the engagement of their daughter Phyllis to Stephen Newmark. An August wedding is planned.” (4) Invite family and friends to a dinner party or other event at which the engagement is announced.• Broken engagements need no announcement if no formal announcement was made. If you’ve written family and friends of the engagement, write the same type of personal note saying simply that you and the other person have broken your engagement; there’s no need to explain why.• When writing to ask friends or relatives to serve as attendants, state what you are asking and who pays for what. Offer them a graceful way of refusing so that they don’t feel pressured. Express your appreciation for their friendship.• Although many arrangements for weddings and commitment ceremonies are made by telephone, you often write letters of confirmation to the temple, church, or location where the ceremony is to be held; to the person who will officiate; to the sexton, organist, cantor, soloist, musicians; to your attendants, ushers, and others; to the photographer and videotaper; to the florist, jeweler, bakery; to hotels to make honeymoon arrangements; to the caterer or club for the reception; to order gifts for attendants, the aisle carpet, candles, ribbons, decorations. These different letters have three requirements in common: give all possible details; ask everything you need to know at the outset; keep copies of your correspondence.• When hosting a wedding shower send handwritten invitations or commercial shower invitations that include: name of the honoree or honorees (bride-to-be, groom-to-be, the couple); type of shower (kitchen, tool, bath, garden, recipe, household); time, date, and place; R.S.V.P. or Regrets only; name, address, and telephone number ofHOW TO SAY IT® / 415the host. Each guest is thanked for their gift at the shower, but thank-you notes are still sent to each person (even those who “went in together” on a gift) soon after the shower. The shower host receives a small gift as well as an especially warm thank you.• Wedding invitations are engraved, printed, or handwritten. Many papers, typeface styles, inks, and designs are available at printers, stationery stores, and large department stores. The more formal the wedding, the more formal the invitations. Formal wedding invitations have two envelopes: the outer one is sealed for mailing, carries your return address, and is hand-addressed; the inner envelope, which contains the invitation (face up as you open the envelope), is unsealed (the flap has no glue) and carries the names of the invitees on the front. There may also be a sheet of tissue paper to protect the engraving, and enclosures such as at-home cards, reception cards, pew cards for a large wedding, maps indicating location of ceremony and reception, and admission cards if the ceremony or reception is held in a public place. Reply cards are inserted in envelopes addressed to you (printed or engraved) and stamped, and then placed in the inner envelope. Concern about our wasteful use of paper prompts some people to omit the inner envelope or to use recycled paper for their invitations. Reply envelopes are at least 5” x 31/2” to comply with postal regulations. If you aren’t using reply cards, include an address or telephone number below the R.S.V.P. so that guests know where to respond. For a small, casual wedding, handwrite invitations in black ink (perhaps a friend will offer calligraphy skills) on good-quality white or off-white notepaper or foldovers. Write in the first-person, in the same way that you would extend any informal invitation. Printed or engraved invitations are rarely sent for a small wedding. Your invitation includes: names of bride and groom; date, time, place; mention of hospitality to follow, if any; expression of pleasure at having guests celebrate with you. The invitation, whether formal or informal, may be issued by the couple, by both their parents, by the woman’s parents, by the man’s parents, or by a relative or family friend—in short, by whoever is hosting the event or whoever is most appropriate. A deceased parent is not named in the invitation as though it were being issued by her or him, but the person can be included if the invitation is sent by the bride and groom (“Jean Lucas, daughter of Martha Lucas and the late George Lucas, and Bruce Wetheral, son of Mr. and Mrs. John Henry Wetheral, request the honour of your presence…”).• Addressing invitations is an art in itself. On the outer envelope, list full names and addresses, with no abbreviations, if possible. On the inner envelope, repeat last names only (“Mr. and Mrs. Hollingrake”).Don’t include young children’s names on the outer envelope but list their first names under the parents’ names on the inner envelope.(Never add “and family.”) Older children (between thirteen and416 / HOW TO SAY IT®eighteen) receive their own invitations. Address one invitation using both full names to an unmarried couple living together. Your return address goes in the upper left-hand corner, unless you use embossed or engraved envelopes, in which case it is on the back flap. (Note that the U.S. Postal Service discourages placing return addresses on the back flap.) Use a good-quality fountain pen, felt tip, or narrow-tipped calligraphy pen to address the envelopes.• Wedding cancellation announcements are similar in style and format to the invitations. If formal wedding invitations were sent, formal cancellation announcements are sent; they shouldn’t be as lavish as the invitations, but should be of approximately the same quality. The message is simple: “Marjorie Corder and Theodore Honey announce that their marriage on the twenty-first of April, two thousand and three, will not take place.”• Printed, engraved, or handwritten announcements, modeled on the wedding invitation, are sent to those who weren’t invited to the ceremony or reception. The same type of stationery is used, and the wording is similar. If formal invitations were sent, the announcements will also be formal; if the wedding was small and informal and invitations were handwritten, the announcements will also be handwritten. They are mailed as near the wedding date as possible (address them in advance), and may include at-home cards. The announcement is made by the bride’s family (“Mr. and Mrs. Raymond Gray announce the marriage of their daughter Polly to…”); by the couple themselves (“Camilla Christy and Matthew Haslam announce their marriage on Saturday, the fifth of June…”); or by both sets of parents (“Evelyn and Peter Gresham and Bridget and Henry Derricks announce the marriage of their daughter and son, Audrey Gresham and George Derricks, on Friday, the third of April, two thousand and three, Emmanuel Lutheran Church, Golding, Nebraska”).• Reply to all wedding invitations. Use the formal reply card or, if there isn’t one, use the same wording and degree of formality as the invitation to either “accept with pleasure” or “decline with regret.” It is not improper to reply informally to a formal invitation. What is absolutely imperative is that you respond. (You need not respond if you are invited to the wedding ceremony only.) When accepting an invitation to a wedding reception, accept only for those people named on the invitation. If your children are not listed, they are not invited.It is highly improper to bring them to the reception. In the same way, if your envelope doesn’t have “and guest” written on it, do not bring someone with you.• Etiquette on thank-you notes for wedding gifts is inflexible: a handwritten thank you is sent for every gift, even if you thanked the individual in person or if you work with the person every day. Both newlyweds are responsible for thank-you notes; whoever writes mentions the other person (“Mae and I appreciate…”; “Hugh joinsHOW TO SAY IT® / 417me in…”). Tradition allowed a month after the wedding to mail thank-you notes and contemporary authorities allow up to three months. However, the advice here is to send them immediately after the honeymoon. “The path of later leads to the house of never”(Donald E. Walker) and for many couples the three months turn into six, which turn into a year, which turns into embarrassment and denial and, finally, a guilty forgetfulness. Because everybody is busy today—even the people who found time to send you a gift—there’s no excuse for not making a priority of sending wedding thank-you notes.• Each thank-you note includes: a mention of the gift (“the silver bread tray,” not “your lovely gift”); an expression of pleasure; aWhat Not to Say• In formal wedding invitations and announcements, don’t abbreviate anything except “Mr.,” “Mrs.,” “Ms.,” “Jr.,” and sometimes military rank. (“Doctor” is written out unless the name following it is too long.) In the case of initials in names, either supply the name for which an initial stands or omit the initial altogether. Write out“Second” and “Third” after a name or use Roman numerals (“Caspar Goodwood II”). There is no comma between the name and the numeral, although there is a comma between the name and “Jr.”(“Caspar Goodwood, Jr.”). The names of states are spelled out (“Alabama,” not Ala. or AL) as are dates (“November third”) and the time (“half past eight o’clock,” “half past five o’clock”). All numbers under 100 are spelled out. No punctuation is used except for commas after the days of the week (“Saturday, the sixteenth of June”) or periods after “Mr.,” “Mrs.,” “Jr.” No words are capitalized except for people’s names, place names, and days of the week or months. The year is not included on wedding invitations, but is usually included on announcements.• When writing thank-you notes for wedding gifts, don’t ask where a gift was purchased so that you can exchange it, and don’t mention duplication of gifts.Tips on Writing• Traditionally “the honour of your presence” indicates a religious ceremony and “the pleasure of your company” is used for civil weddings or for wedding receptions.• Watch for nonparallel forms when referring to the wedding couple in invitations, announcements, and other wedding correspondence—for exampie, “the marriage of Adela Polperro to Mr. Lucian Gildersleeve.” Use honorifics for both (Ms. and Mr., for example) or418 / HOW TO SAY IT®for neither (neither is preferred). The phrase “man and wife” is “husband and wife” or “man and woman.”• Timing: ask friends to be your attendants as soon as you have a date; order printed or engraved invitations at least three months before the wedding; begin to address invitations two months or more before the wedding (the envelopes can be picked up earlier than the invitations); mail all invitations at the same time—between three and six weeks before the wedding.• If you use reply cards, invitees will know how to respond. If you don’t, insert an address or telephone number below the R.S.V.P. so they know where to send their responses.• In her 1941 book, Mary Owens Crowther tells readers mailing wedding invitations: “Do not use two one-cent stamps in place of a two-cent stamp. Somehow one-cent stamps are not dignified.” Although her advice is dated, considering the appearance of your postage stamps is not; most invitations and announcements use attractive or meaningful commemorative stamps.• When you receive an engagement or wedding announcement, there is no obligation to send a gift, but it is customary to write your congratulations to the engaged or newly married couple. You may properly offer either one your “congratulations” or “best wishes.”(These expressions used to be sex-linked; one was limited to use for the woman, one for the man.)• If you are late with your wedding congratulations, write anyway.Most people will understand and will be pleased that you remembered at all. Apologize only briefly for the delay.• Jot a brief description of the wedding gift on the back of the signed card that accompanies it. This has proved useful to more than a few newly married couples trying to determine which of the mystery gifts came from whom.Special Situations• In today’s over-scheduled world, many couples send “save the date” letters or even e-mails to notify family and friends of a wedding that may be a year or more in the future. Invitations are sent later in the normal way, six weeks before the wedding. While six weeks’ notice was ample in the days when families and friends lived in the same small town and knew each other’s news, today it is inadequate for making flight reservations, scheduling vacations around the date, or keeping the work calendar free for that day.• For a wedding announcement published in the newspaper, include as much of the following as allowed: bride’s and groom’s full names; date, time, and place of wedding; name of officiator or presider; names of members of the wedding party (and relation to the wedding couple);HOW TO SAY IT® / 419names, hometowns, and occupations or accomplishments of the couple’s parents (and occasionally grandparents); information on the couple’s education and careers; description of the flowers, music, and wedding party’s clothes; where the reception was held; the couple’s address after marriage. (If the woman keeps her birth name or if the couple adopts a hyphenated name, this is a good way to let people know: “Marian Belthem and Augustus F.G. Richmond will be living at 1871 Meredith.”) Avoid nicknames and abbreviations. Call your newspaper in advance for guidelines on submitting wedding announcements. Some newspapers publish information about weddings only if there is news value. Others charge a fee for announcements. Some will publish either an engagement notice or a wedding announcement, but not both. And others will not print an announcement if it is “old news”—arriving more than several weeks after the wedding. Some want the information about three weeks before the wedding so that it can be run the day after the wedding. Wedding announcements can also be sent to employee newsletters, alumnae/alumni magazines, or other affiliation publications.• When the bride, the groom, or both are members of the military, it’s customary to use their rank on invitations and announcements unless they are noncommissioned officers or enlisted personnel, in which case it may be omitted.• Prospective in-laws apprecicate a gracious note of welcome by members of the family.• When you invite some people to the wedding and others to both wedding and reception, your wedding invitation mentions the ceremony only. Enclose a card (about 3” x 4”, and of the same style stationery as the invitation) with an invitation to the reception. It is a shortened form of the wedding invitation: “Nora Hopper and George Trimmins request the pleasure of your company at their wedding reception [or: a reception following their wedding], on Saturday, the twelfth of June, Walter Village Inn, 55 North Walter Street. R.S.V.P.”If all guests are invited to both the wedding and reception, you add, after the place of the wedding on your invitation, “Reception immediately following” or “and afterward at…” or “followed by a reception at…”• When prospective wedding guests indicate in their acceptance that they are bringing a friend or their children, whom you have not invited, write that you are pleased they can come to the wedding but that the reception is limited to those invited because of space or is for adults only. When you invite friends who may not know anyone at the reception, you can either call them for the name of a companion (so you can send a personal invitation) or add “and Guest” to their invitation.• To inform friends and relatives of your address after marriage, enclose an at-home card in your wedding invitation or announcement.420 / HOW TO SAY IT®It is usually the same style as your other wedding stationery, about 23/4” x 4”: “Linda Condon and Arnaud Hallet will be at home after the sixth of June at 1918 Hergesheimer Road, Waunakee, Wisconsin 53597.”• To let family and friends know that the woman plans to keep her birth name or that the couple is adopting a hyphenated or an altogether new surname, insert a small printed or engraved card (matching the wedding stationery) in the wedding invitation or announcement:“After their marriage, Clarissa Graham and Charles Belton will use the surname Belton-Graham,” or “Clarissa Graham wishes to announce that following her marriage she will retain her birth name.”Format• Engagement or wedding announcement notices sent to newspapers are typed and double-spaced. If a photograph accompanies it, identify it on the back in case it gets separated from the announcement. (Use a return-address label or taped-on piece of paper; don’t write directly on the back of the photo.)• Wedding invitations and announcements are engraved, printed, or handwritten. A bewildering variety of papers, type styles, inks, and designs are available at printers, stationery stores, and large department stores. Ecru remains the most popular color for invitations and social stationery. Your choice depends on the type of wedding—the more formal the wedding, the more formal the invitations and announcements. You can order matching name cards, thank-you notes, informals, notepaper, or other stationery at the same time.• Envelopes (for example, for reply cards and thank-you notes) must be at least 3½” x 5” to comply with postal regulations. And if your invitations are oversized or weigh more than an ounce (which happens with high-quality paper and two envelopes) they will need extra postage.• When responding to an invitation that contained no reply card, use formal notepaper or foldovers. If you have a card with your name on it, write underneath your name “accepts with pleasure” or “declines with regret” and then repeat the information about the event and the date.WORDSacknowledgeannounceblesscelebrateceremonycongratulationshappinessjoymarriagematrimonynuptialspleasureHOW TO SAY IT® / 421ritualunionvowswishesPHRASESacknowledges with thanks the re-groom’s dinnerceipt ofhappy to announce/to invite you tohelp us celebrate our weddinginvite you to celebrate with usjoined in holy matrimonyour fondest congratulationsrehearsal dinnerrequest the honour of your presencerequest the pleasure of your com-panyshare in the joyunited in wedlockwedding partywe would be honored towish to acknowledge the receipt ofwitness our marriageSENTENCESAurelia and I were greatly touched by the beautiful family tea service you gave us for our wedding—we feel we’re now connected to all the family that’s gone before and all that is yet to come.Best wishes on your wedding day!Jane Vallens and Andrew Satchel gratefully acknowledge the receipt of your beautiful wedding gift and look forward to writing you a personal note of thanks at an early date.Jesse joins me in thanking you for the oil painting you did especially for us—it is our first piece of original art!Mary Llewellyn and Martin Hallam request the pleasure of your company at the marriage of their daughter Mary Frances.Our very best wishes to you both for many years of happiness, health, and prosperity.Please join us in celebrating the marriage of our daughter Sally to William Carter.Thank you for your generous check, which will go a long way toward helping us buy the piano we have our eye on!The ceremony will take place at 1:30 p.m., and a reception at the house will follow.We’re sorry, but we are limited in the number of guests we can have at the reception—we hope you’ll still be able to come and that we can meet your cousin some other time.422 / HOW TO SAY IT®We were delighted to hear of your engagement—Anita is an intelligent, beautiful, and kind young woman, and the two of you are beautifully matched!We wish you every happiness as you celebrate the love you have for each other.PARAGRAPHSWe would like to make an appointment with you to discuss the music for our wedding, which is scheduled for June 16 at 1:00 p.m. We have some ideas (and will bring some music with us), but we would appreciate some suggestions from you.Julia and I will be married at our apartment on Saturday, June eight-eenth at 5:30 p.m. It would mean a great deal to us if you would join us for the ceremony and for dinner afterwards.You could not have chosen a more exquisite gift than the Waterford clock. I was deeply moved by your love and generosity. Unfortunately, Kit and I have canceled the wedding and we are returning all gifts. As you can imagine, I will never forget your thoughtfulness and I will always think of you whenever I see Waterford crystal.Christina Hossett and Albert Edward Preemby were married June 18, 2002, at Wells First Christian Church. The Reverend Wilfred Devizes performed the ceremony. Parents are Mr. and Mrs. H.G. Hossett of Wells and Mr. and Mrs. A.E. Preemby, Sr., of Waynesville. Christina and Albert want to thank all the guests who celebrated with them. Both are employed at Stephens Insurance.Bernice and I are absolutely delighted with the electric blanket. You must have been poor students yourselves once, living on the third floor of an old brownstone, hoping that perhaps today the heat might make it all the way upstairs. It’s a beautiful, thoughtful, practical gift, and we’re grateful.SAMPLE LETTERSThe honour of your presenceis requested at the marriage ofSybil Anstey HerberttoHarry Jardineon Saturday, the tenth of OctoberHOW TO SAY IT® / 423at one o’clockLehmann Methodist Churchand afterward atThe New Lehmann InnR.S.V.P.Sybil Anstey Herbert20 Ianthe CourtLehmann, OH 45042Mr. Edmund Roundelayregrets that owing tothe recent death ofEvelyn Ferguson Roundelaythe invitations to the marriageof their daughter Crystalto Maxwell Dunstonmust be recalled.Dear Lucy and Fred,Christopher and I are so pleased you will be able to attend our wedding celebration. I’m afraid there’s been a misunderstanding, however. You know how much we enjoy Freddy, Elsa, and Charles, but we are not planning on having any children at the reception. I hope you can find a babysitter so you can still come. Thanks for understanding.Love,Miss Laetitia Prismregrets that she is unable to acceptthe kind invitation ofMr. and Mrs. Oscar Fairfaxto the marriage of their daughterGwendolyn FairfaxSaturday, the sixth of June424 / HOW TO SAY IT®two thousand and threeat 7:30 p.m.Dear Marjorie,Will and I have finally made the great decision—we’re going to be married next August 19! And the really important question is: will you be my attendant? I can’t imagine having anyone but you. However, if you can’t get away—and what with your job, Richard’s new business, and the children’s activities, I know it will take some doing—I will certainly understand.Enclosed is a sketch of the dress you’d wear. I want to pay for it, so don’t worry about that. And of course you’ll stay at the house, but unfortunately my budget won’t run to your airfare. Will that be a problem?I’ll call next week after you’ve had time to think about this. In the meantime, Will sends his love along with mine.Mr. and Mrs. Orville Jonesaccept with pleasurethe kind invitation ofBelinda JorricksandCharles Stobbsto their marriage onFriday, the tenth of Maytwo thousand and threeat 7:00 p.m.St. James A.M.E. Zion ChurchReception followingSurtees Country Club1838 Plains HighwayChristina Allaby and Theobald Pontifexannounce with great pleasuretheir marriage onHOW TO SAY IT® / 425Saturday, the twenty-third of Junetwo thousand and fourButler, MaineDear Grace and Harold,Our dear Stella and Stanley Kowalski are being married on Saturday, September 4, at 3:00 p.m. in an informal ceremony at our house.We’d love to have you celebrate with us, and stay after the ceremony for a small reception. Let me know if you can join us.Fondly,Mimi Wynant and Christian Jorgensenannounce that their marriagehas been postponed fromSaturday, the third of JuneuntilSaturday, the sixth of Augustat two o’clockSt. Anselm’s ChurchWebster CityReception to followWebster City County ClubSee also: ACCEPTANCES, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ANNOUNCEMENTS, BELATED, CONGRATULATIONS, INVITATIONS, REFUSALS, REQUESTS, RESPONSES, THANK YOU.