50Letters of WelcomeCome in the evening, or come in the morning,Come when you’re looked for, or come without warning.Kisses and welcomes you’ll find here before you,And the oftener you come here the more I’ll adore you.—THOMAS OSBORNE DAVISBecause they’re optional, letters of welcome are read with surprise, pleasure, and gratitude. They are a powerful sales tool for businesses, and a charming approach to smoothing and cementing interpersonal relations among neighbors, co-workers, and people with whom we have frequent dealings.For the naturally hospitable among us, they are a way of life and a joy to write.Write Letters of Welcome to• new business contacts/customers/clients• new businesses in the neighborhood• new co-workers/employees• new members of club/organization/temple/church• new neighbors• new students/teachers• potential customers/clients• prospective in-lawsHow to Say It• State how happy you are to have the person join your company, store, division, club, family, group, neighborhood.• Offer to help the person become acquainted with their new surroundings, duties, colleagues, neighbors.• Tell something positive about the neighborhood, company, or organization the person is joining. If a special event is coming up, mention it to give the person something to look forward to.• Suggest a possible future meeting, a store visit, an invitation to call you, or at least say that you’re looking forward to meeting sometime 426HOW TO SAY IT® / 427soon. Assure the person you’ll be glad to answer questions (include your telephone number)What Not to Say• Don’t refer to negative aspects of the person’s new situation, for example, the mountains of unfinished work left by a predecessor or the roof problems that troubled the previous owner.• Don’t say “Good luck!” It implies that good luck will be needed.• Avoid a strong selling message when welcoming customers.Tips on Writing• Send your welcome promptly; it is most appreciated when the new kid on the block still feels insecure.• Find common ground between you or your organization and the person you’re welcoming (“I understand you’re a gardener—you’ll be interested to know that many of us are!”).• The welcome letter is a fitting place to let the newcomer subtly know about any unwritten rules you might have. (“Although there’s never time to chat during office hours, I’d like to get to know you better over lunch someday” or “We look forward to seeing you once you’re settled in—but do give us a call first.”)Special Situations• When welcoming new employees, include detailed terms of employment to avoid later misunderstandings: hours, duties, salary, title, starting date, supervisor. If the newcomer receives packets of information—building regulations, benefits, contact numbers—include a letter of welcome as the first sheet in the packet. A brief handwritten note from a superior, sent separately, is a powerful way to inspire loyalty and enthusiasm.• In late August, some elementary school teachers send postcards to welcome incoming students and to help them feel positive about returning to school. Mention a project that the class will enjoy or say,“I think we’re going to have a great year.” As this requires money for stamps and stationery, access to class lists, time, and energy, the parents of a child who isn’t looking forward to the new school year might offer to help the teacher with welcome notes.• When welcoming a new business or new family to your market area, establish name-recognition and product-association in their minds. Offer a free service or product to introduce the potential customer to your goods and services and to encourage a visit to your office428 / HOW TO SAY IT®or store. Enclose a coupon for a small gift or a discount. A relatively inexpensive but useful gift to newcomers is information, for example, a card with phone numbers of area services, hospitals, day-care centers, schools, or hotlines. In a welcome letter, the sales message is more effective when it is unobtrusive and undemanding. A personal letter of welcome to potential customers over the manager’s or president’s signature will be more cost-effective than mass-produced flyers stuck between a door.• After a customer or client visits your place of business, follow up with a letter of welcome. If you have not done so earlier, you might now offer some sort of discount or coupon to encourage the customer to return a second time—the possible beginnings of a habit.• To invite prospective customers to an open house or to visit your new store or offices at their convenience, see INVITATIONS.Format• Letters to new neighbors, prospective in-laws, and new students or teachers are handwritten on foldovers or personal stationery.• Welcome letters that carry a sales message and letters to new employees, colleagues, and organization members are typed on letterhead or business-personal stationery.• Postcards are often used to welcome new customers with a special offer or discount.WORDScommunitycongregationdelightedexcitedfuturegreetingshopehospitalityintroduceinvitemeetneighborhoodorganizationpleasedquestionsreceptiontogethervisitPHRASESbid a cordial welcomedelighted to make your acquaint-anceeager to serve youexpect long and fruitful years of as-sociationextend a welcomefamily circlegood place to pitch your tenthelp you get establishedHOW TO SAY IT® / 429look forward to meeting/seeing youlook us upmake yourself at homeopen arms/door/housepleasure to welcome youso happy you can jointake great pleasure into help you get acquaintedwarm reception waitingwelcome aboard/backwelcome matSENTENCESI look forward to a mutually satisfying business relationship.I’m pleased to welcome you to the Board of Directors of the Margaret Peel Museum.It is with the greatest pleasure that I welcome you to Paragon Photo Processing.Let us know how we can help you feel quickly at home.The door is always open to you.The Packles & Son Theatrical Agency is pleased to welcome you to our select family of talented clients.To introduce you to the faculty, there will be a welcome reception Thursday, September 8.We believe you will enjoy meeting this challenge with us.We hope you’ll enjoy this area and the great neighbors as much as we have.Welcome to the team!We welcome you to Daphnis Wool and Textiles and look forward to a long, productive, and satisfying collaboration.You’ve made a wonderful choice (in my opinion)!PARAGRAPHSIt is my great pleasure to welcome you to the Rivermouth Centipedes.The enclosed preapproved membership card entitles you to all benefits and privileges of club membership.We officially welcome Ottila Gottescheim as Director of Education on Friday, August 7 at 6:30 p.m. Please join us for services and an Oneg Shabbat in her honor.Welcome toSportsStory,the best sports fiction published today! You will receive your first issue shortly. Don’t forget to vote for your favorite story every month on our Internet site.Nothing pleases us more than to be able to say “welcome back” when430 / HOW TO SAY IT®an inactive account is revived. We appreciate your return to our list of active accounts and look forward to serving you again.Welcome to Plattsville! All of us here at The Tarkington Gift and Card Shop hope that you soon feel at home in your new surroundings and that you find much to enjoy and appreciate in Plattsville. To help acquaint you with your new town, we have put together a packet of information in conjunction with the chamber of commerce that we hope you will find helpful. Also enclosed is a coupon for 25% off your first purchase with us.Welcome to Clyde Episcopal Church. I hope you felt “at home” with us at your first service last Sunday. On February 16 at 7:00 p.m. we are having a welcome party for new parishioners in the church hall. Newcomers have found it helpful to meet some of their neighbors and to hear about the programs we offer. We hope that the whole family will be able to come.Thank you for your first purchase at Eyvind Hardware, and welcome to our store! We are more than “just a hardware store.” You can ask any of us for advice and information on a wide range of topics—whether it’s the most appropriate floor finish for your home, the differences between grades of sandpaper and steel wool, how to use our rental products, or the advantages and disadvantages of various grout cleaners. Bring us all your home maintenance questions. To show our appreciation for your business, we are enclosing a coupon good for a free pair of gardening gloves. Visit us again soon!SAMPLE LETTERSDear Ms. Spenser-Smith:It is with the greatest pleasure that we welcome you to the E.H. Young Literary Society. Enclosed please find: a list of members, a copy of our by-laws, a schedule of this year’s meetings, minutes from the last meeting, and an annotated bibliography of the books we’ll be reading this year.Your mentor—to make your introduction into the Society as pleasant as possible—will be Ms. Hannah Mole. If you have any questions, please feel free to direct them to her or to me.I am looking forward to visiting with you after the next meeting.Sincerely yours,Dear Mr. Jellyband:The Dover Business Association welcomes you to one of the busiest and most successful retail areas on the south coast. Those of us who own or manage businesses here have been working together for the past eleven years to bring new business in and to promote the area. Enclosed is a description of the group’s purpose and activities.HOW TO SAY IT® / 431As the new owner of The Fisherman’s Rest, you are cordially invited to join the Association. The next meeting will be held June 15 at The Crown and Feather. We hope you will enjoy doing business in Dover as much as we have.Feel free to contact any of the listed members for information or assistance.Sincerely,Dear Dr. and Mrs. Townshend-Mahony,Welcome to Buddlecombe! We’re having a neighborhood barbe-cue/potluck dinner on August 3 at our place, and we would love to have you come. Most of the neighbors will be there, and we think you’ll enjoy meeting them. If you’d like to bring something, a cold salad would be perfect.Yours truly,Dear Mr. Harness,I am pleased to tell you that your six-month review shows that your work is more than satisfactory, your sales record is exceptional, and your relationships with managers, co-workers, and customers are all very cordial and productive. As of today, you are being upgraded from temporary to permanent employee status. Welcome to Trengartha Tin Plate Works.With best wishes,Dear Godfrey,Nancy just told us the good news, and we are both happy that she has chosen to spend the rest of her life with you, and you with her. We were not entirely surprised, as we’ve been hearing about you quite a bit lately!You already feel like part of the family, and we’re looking forward to seeing you both at the end of the month. Welcome to the family!Dear Mr. and Mrs. Webb,Welcome to Groves Corners. We sincerely hope you’ll enjoy living in this friendly community. We at Thornton Furniture offer you a special welcome and invite you to come in and say hello to our friendly, courteous salespeople who are eager to serve you. To make your shopping even more convenient and enjoyable, we are pleased to extend credit privileges to you. Just fill out an application form the next time you are in the store.We are always happy to answer questions, help you find what you need, or place special orders. Don’t hesitate to ask. We pride ourselves on satisfying our customers!432 / HOW TO SAY IT®Yours truly,See also: EMPLOYMENT, GOODWILL, NEIGHBORS, SALES.