9Appointments and InterviewsShowing up is 80% of life.—WOODY ALLENMany appointments, interviews, and meetings arranged by telephone are often confirmed by letter, fax, or e-mail.Some appointment letters are simple: confirming or altering an appointment; reminding someone of an appointment; refusing or canceling an appointment.When you want someone’s time in order to sell your company’s product or service, however, the letter requesting an appointment must be an outstanding sales letter, persuading the person that it is in their interest to see you.To secure a job interview, send some combination of carefully crafted résumé, cover letter, or letter of application (see APPLICATIONS, RESUMES).Letters About Appointments Include• accepting• asking for/requesting• canceling• changing/postponing/delaying• confirming/following up• refusing• thanking forHow to Say It• When asking for an appointment: identify yourself if you’re unknown to the person; explain why you want to meet with them; mention a benefit to them in meeting with you; suggest a length of time for the appointment (“fifteen minutes” or “no more than half an hour of your time”); offer possible dates, times, and places; mention others who will be present; give your address, phone number, e-mail address, and fax number; express your appreciation for the person’s 66HOW TO SAY IT® / 67attention to your request. In some cases, tell when you will call for their response.• When agreeing to meet with someone: say “yes” to the meeting; repeat the purpose, date, time, place, and length of meeting; express your pleasure or thanks (see also ACCEPTANCES, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS).• When confirming arrangements made in person or by telephone: refer to your previous discussion; repeat the meeting specifics—date, time, place, purpose; close with an expression of pleasure (“look forward to discussing this”).• When changing or postponing an appointment: mention the original time, date, and place; state your alternatives; apologize for the inconvenience; ask for confirmation of the new time.• When refusing a request for an appointment: thank the person for their letter or telephone call; say “no” politely and neutrally; if appropriate, offer an alternative way to meet the goals of the proposed meeting; if you wish, indicate why you cannot accept, although a simple “I am unable to meet with you” should suffice.• When canceling arrangements: repeat the time, date, place; state that you must cancel; briefly explain why; apologize for the inconvenience; offer a substitute action, if appropriate.• When sending a follow-up letter after an appointment: give the date of the meeting; state your pleasure at all that was accomplished; enclose promised information or materials; refer to your hope for future meetings/contacts/business.What Not to Say• Don’t “postpone” or “delay” a meeting that you are actually canceling. If you have no intention of ever meeting with the person, use the word “cancel” and omit all references to the future.• Don’t over-apologize for canceling or changing an appointment unless the situation is special (you’ve requested the meeting and the company has invited upper-level management and arranged for refreshments and video equipment). Usually all you need is a brief “I’m sorry to have to cancel/change/postpone…” For more complex situations, see APOLOGIES.Tips on Writing• Be assertive about making appointments; if you leave it to the other person (“I’d appreciate hearing from you”) you may not get a response.• Thank the person who sets up the meeting when there are more than two people getting together.68 / HOW TO SAY IT®• Some people are persistent about wanting your time, from the neighbor who is determined to learn everything you know about genealogy or playing bridge to the sales representative who won’t take no for an answer. When it’s someone you will continue to deal with (the neighbor), write a note, using equal doses of tact and firm-ness: “I know you will understand, but I must say no.” In the face of persistence, never give a reason for your “no.” The moment you say why you are unable to meet with them (“I’m really busy just now”), they will have a response (“It will only take a minute”). When you offer another reason, they will have another rebuttal. Engaging you in wearying debate is part of the strategy; you wouldn’t be the first person to say “yes” just to avoid being harangued. A simple “I’m sorry, but no” repeated many times is most effective—and putting it in writing doubles its effect.Special Situations• When requesting a sales or job interview, use your letter to pique the person’s curiosity. Make them want to see you. Sell your product or yourself, but don’t tell so much that the person thinks nothing more will be gained by an interview.• If you forget an interview, appointment, or meeting, write an immediate, sincere apology. Ask what you can do to make amends.Format• Correspondence about business appointments, interviews, and meetings is typewritten on business letterhead or personal-business stationery.• Interoffice and some out-of-house communications about meetings are handled by memo or e-mail.• Letters regarding personal appointments can be either typed or handwritten. The more formal or personal the appointment is, the stronger the indication for a handwritten message.WORDSacceptconsultexaminepleasuresessionarrangecontactinterviewpostponeunableconferdiscussionnotifyreviewHOW TO SAY IT® / 69PHRASESalready committed/have plansmeet with youanother engagementmove up the date toan unexpected complicationof interest to youcan’t keep our original dateprevious commitmentsconvenient timeset a time and dateintroduce you tounfortunately obliged tolooking forward to seeing/when you are ablemeeting youwon’t be freemay I suggestwould be convenient for meSENTENCESCan we change our meeting on July 15 from 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.?I am unfortunately obliged to change the date we set earlier.I don’t believe a meeting would benefit either of us.If you’re unable to make the meeting on the tenth, please let my assistant know as soon as possible.If you would like to discuss this, I could meet with you at a time convenient for you.I’ll give you a call in a couple of days to see if you can schedule a meeting with me.I’m not able to meet with you for several months—please contact me again in late January.I would be happy to meet with you in my office on Friday, November 8, at two o’clock to discuss your invention.I would appreciate twenty minutes of your time this week.I would like to meet with you to discuss Jackie’s progress so far on the new medication.I would like to review with you my current salary, which I believe no longer reflects my responsibilities and contributions.Let me know as soon as possible if this is convenient for you.May I stop by your office for a few minutes next week to drop off our latest samples and catalog and to explain how our new service contract works?Mr. Patterne is seriously ill and will be unable to keep his appointment with you on June 23 at 1:30.Thank you for your time yesterday—I enjoyed meeting with you.70 / HOW TO SAY IT®This will confirm your appointment with Ms. Tucker on Tuesday, December 18, at 3:00 p.m.We would like to discuss with you, either in person or over the telephone, our concerns about the academic progress of our daughter, May Bracknel.PARAGRAPHSAfter you have evaluated my application and résumé, I hope we can arrange an interview at a mutually convenient time. I note several areas where the company’s areas of emphasis and my areas of expertise overlap, and I would like to discuss these aspects of the position. You will no doubt have questions for me as well. I look forward to hearing from you.Charlotte Moulin, managing director of Hardy’s Cycle Supply, will be in Alberta the week of August 4, and would like to tour Wheels Un-limited while she is there. Please let me know if something can be arranged.I understand you are looking for acreage east of town. May I come in and speak with you sometime this week about the property I have for sale?Thank you for the copies of the contracts, which we received October 31. As we review them with our lawyer, a few questions occur to us. We would appreciate being able to sit down with you and your lawyer to discuss a few of them. When would this be possible?Did I have the date wrong? I thought we had a meeting scheduled for 1:30 yesterday. I’m afraid I won’t be free again until late next week, but maybe we can arrange something then. Please let me hear from you.May I have fifteen minutes of your time next week to show you some large colored photographs of what Office Greenery has done for other area businesses? Offices that use our services report increased customer and employee satisfaction, and I think you will be glad you investigated our unique, effective, and cost-efficient program. I will call your secretary on Monday to see if you are available for a brief meeting.We are interested in replacing the decorative stone brick on our home and would like you to give us an estimate on your lightweight “cultured stone.” Please call either of us at work during the day or at home during the evening (see enclosed business cards) to set up an appointment.Thank you.SAMPLE LETTERSDear Mr. Stobbs:I’ve received your letter of June 16 requesting an appointment to see me about your Handley Cross computer software.HOW TO SAY IT® / 71We have been using the Surtees line of software for all our business needs for the past three years, and we are very satisfied with it. I don’t see a meeting benefiting either of us.Thanks anyway.Yours truly,Dear Lionel,I have to cancel the meeting we set up for Friday, September 3, at 2:30p.m., as we’ve got a little trouble at the Valliscourt plant. I should be back on September 6 and will call you then to set up another appointment.Thanks for understanding.Sincerely,Dear Ms. Vulliamy:People with disabilities get hired for one very special reason: they’re qualified.I would like to tell you about some of the highly qualified people listed with the Ogilvy Employment Agency who could make a positive and energetic contribution to your organization.May I meet with you sometime next week?Sincerely,Dear Laura Payton:Our longtime supplier of plastic tubing has recently informed us that they are discontinuing their plastic tubing division. Our vice-president of purchasing will be visiting several plastic tubing manufacturers in your area next week.Would it be possible for you to schedule a meeting and plant tour for him on Tuesday or Wednesday of next week? Enclosed are data on our projected needs for plastic tubing, our production schedules, and delivery requirements that may be helpful to you in preparing for his visit.Thank you.Sincerely,See also: ACCEPTANCES, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, EMPLOYMENT, FOLLOW-UP, INVITATIONS, REFUSALS, REQUESTS, THANK YOU.